Abstract

Fashion is a form of self-expression influenced by the period of time, location, and a specific context. Throughout history, people have used fashion to express themselves and as a form of communication, to make statements or show the community they belong to. This form of self-expression is constantly changing, not only over time, but also through new media and styles. With the rise of digital and information technology, such as virtual and augmented reality, the line between technology intersects with fashion has blurred. This has transformed traditional tangible products into digital representation in the virtual and augmented space,

as well as the fused interactivity into everyday fashionable items such as wearable devices, e.g. smartwatches.

A new wave of digital fashion products has come to life with the rise of social media and companies seeking to expand their products onto these platforms. However, these products are limited by design, constrained by a 2D pixel representation of fashion, unconnected to the user and the real world. To move beyond existing limits in digital fashion, this project considers the role of recent advances in wearable technology like bio-sensors, and augmented reality and how they may play in better connecting the virtual and real worlds. By transforming real-time biometric data into dynamic and fluidic AR clothing, new opportunities for digital self-expression are unlocked.

Emoshion - a biosensory virtual fashion - transforms real-time emotion data into dynamic and fluid digital clothing. By wearing a small wireless sensor, one’s instant emotional status data can be displayed as his/her digital clothing. Through a smart device with AR technology, the person can create online content such as social media posts and live streams wearing his/her Emoshion. It reinforces one’s distinctive self-expression in the digital world.

To build this, I researched Emotion Theory which categorizes different emotions based on Valence and Arousal. Specifically, I focused on internal emotions, which are unconscious and uncontrollable responses that can only be captured by bio-sensors. Captured data is analyzed to determine one’s emotion and is visualized through various colors, shapes, and vibrations of the piece of fashion. As implemented across a 15-week semester, the project explores only a limited subset of possible biometric sensing strategies. Further, as with all systems that involve the measuring of biometric data, a thorough ethical review process is warranted, but has not yet been completed. The project discusses more the core idea of digital fashion and how we can bring real-time bio-signal information into fashion.

Using speculative design and asking where digital fashion can go in the future, this idea bridges current digital fashion to cutting-edge information and communication technologies. This is a first step to the next generation of digital fashion, one that connects a user to what they wear digitally on a deeper level, a true form of unique self-expression. In the future, I would like to research how users interact with this medium of art, and incorporate more advanced and accurate algorithms to differentiate emotions. In addition, I would like to build my own digital fashion brand.

History/Prior Art

Current available virtual fashion - Karl Lagerfeld (on the left) and Carlings (on the right) is almost

identical to traditional physical fashion.

The project Emoshion contains two parts of prior research and reference: on the one hand, academics and practitioners have been exploring using biosignals for physical clothing and fashion design to enhance individuals’ characteristic expression; on the other hand, digital fashion and business world have been trying to sell pretty staff and story to make profit.

Academics and practitioners have been exploring using biosignals for physical clothing and fashion design to enhance individuals’ characteristic expression. Philips Design prototyped a concept design Bubelle that reflected the emotional state on a dress. Hartman et al. fabricated wearable muscle-activated kinetic textile to extend body language for personal expression. Farahi designed interactive garments morphing according to input such as gaze, facial expression, and body movement. Howell et al. displayed skin conductance as colors on t-shirts to support social communication. Augmented by biometric data, the fashionable dress has intensified self-expression to be more embodied, dynamic, and fluid. However, most of these designs are still in research stages or only for performing art and exhibitions. The expressive biosensory fashion has yet accessible for the mass audience as there are several constraints for physical fashion: The delicacy of the mechanical structure and biometric sensor installation induces the difficulty for mass production but only for exhibiting uses. The physical garment that requires exquisite fabrication and tailors for individuals makes it only accessible to the minority of the wealthy. The slow process of biosignal’s reflection on materiality causes insufficiency and ambiguity on personal expression.

The rapidly booming fashion NFTs has brought customers a brand new fashion experience in the digital world. Nevertheless, it does not fully utilize the digital advantages but has created virtual products identical to traditional physical fashion. Virtual fashion should not simply duplicate the real world since it is fundamentally different from physical fashion. Albeit physical fashion is designed for self-expression and autonomy, its essence as clothing requires considerations of materiality, comfortability, well-fitting, protection, and other functionality. Unlike physical fashion, virtual fashion has no limitation to the aforementioned features. It is rather like a wearable visual self-expression medium than a protective garment. Its digital base makes it possible to take various personal data to augment the unique personal identity and expression.

The motivation for this project is building discussion and artworks about connecting emotion visualization with design to build possibilities and scenarios. As we can see from the above’s prior works, many designers and artists are trying to use new technology like bio-sensor and digital fashion to explore the boundary of human communication or self-reflection. There are also many negative comments on bio-sensor around privacy. How can we create better solutions to use this technology and why this is important?

Virtual fashion changes morph according to one’s emotional state data collected by an integrated wearable sensor.

When transferring biosensory fashion to the virtual world, we may break the bottleneck of the physical medium. Its existence in the digital world allows any fancy design without the limitation of mechanics and material. The screen-based design can quickly reflect biosignal changes on the clothing in real-time. The relatively low cost makes the expressive fashion more accessible to broader consumers. When personal biometric data can be reflected in the virtual fashion, how might we represent ourselves in the digital world? How might virtual fashion support people being more expressive and becoming unique individuals?

So first, we did research about emotion definition. Emotion is a very vague but very important way to communicate between individuals. The most famous model for emotion is divided by valence and arousal, which means every emotion can be categorized by four dimensions: “high arousal and positive”, “low arousal and negative”, “high arousal and negative”, “low arousal and positive”. People will use color, and shape to visualize and communicate emotion, which is very important for us to reference.

The design process comes in four parts: design fiction; aesthetic fashion piece; interactive prototype; thought and philosophical thesis. For the design fiction part, I talked with Julian Bleecker about how to phrase this story more naturally and compelling. So I put the product into the future to create some user scenarios. Aesthetic fashion pieces are coming out from different generated animations of the blender. The interactive prototype will be realized in unity with the connection of real-time sensors. For the thought and philosophical part, the thesis will come from previous research about bio-signal and communication among people, or user research results.

We contribute Emoshion - a biosensory virtual fashion that transforms real-time emotion data into dynamic and fluid digital clothing. By wearing a small wireless sensor, one’s instant emotional status data can be displayed as his/her digital clothing. Through a smart device with AR technology, the person can create online content such as social media posts and live streams wearing his/her Emoshion. It reinforces one’s distinctive self-expression in the digital world.

We use an integrated small wearable sensor in the prototype that can stream 16+ body signals for emotional state detection. Through the data of GSR/EDA, PPG (photoplethysmogram), skin conductivity by humidity and temperature, and presumable submovement data from 3-axis magnetometer, and 6-axis accelerometer & gyroscope, we can control features of a virtual fashion clothing, such as its morph, fluid speed, color, and material.  We use a real-time human pose estimation algorithm to attach the virtual fashion to its owner’s body captured from a camera sensor. Currently, we build one design prototype that transforms from one morph to another when emotional arousal is detected. We also build a virtual fashion brand with four different fashion pieces and a website to try the AR experience in touchdesigner.

Discussion

In this design process, there are three interesting things to consider: “transform technology limitations into opportunities”, "data with humanity", and "concrete scenarios lead to the imagination".

“Transform technology limitations into opportunities” - The current technology of measuring emotion still has many problems. And also emotion is a very vague and subjective concept, which leads to very ambiguous data to visualize very concrete emotions. For example, the current technology only can sense people’s arousal, but not valence (positive or negative). Moreover, different people have a different concept of what is a concrete emotion, like happiness, sadness, etc. However, the opportunities to transform technology limitations into opportunities are using the ambiguous visualization to be an auxiliary tool to help people think about their relationship with emotion, but not only give them the accurate answer. In that way, the product becomes more playful and protects the privacy of users.

“Data with humanity” -  we just talk about the limitation of the technology. Based on this, we would like to think about what data is and what is the relationship between data and humans. Modern humans believe in data and we have an intuition that what data shows is accurate. However, all of the data is used by humans and processing by humans. Every data visualization has its bias or designer’s representation. Also combined with the limitation of emotional data, we think we should design for things to help people, but not for people to fully rely on. The importance of this project is that it provides a vision for creators and users. For individuals, how they think and interpret the design is freer and based on different people. For example, when two people socialize with each other with seeing their cloth change with their emotions, how they interpret emotions may be completely different. But all of that is base on the conversation and interaction they have together.

"Concrete scenarios lead to the imagination" - Emoshion has presented in front of different users and they also try it. Many people will worry about the privacy issue. For example, people will say: ”very shy to show my feeling in front of a lot of people”, or “who will have my emotion data? That sounds like a very tricky thing”. However, when we think about other concrete scenarios, they will feel more comfortable with the application scenarios. For example, the self-reflection scenario.Sometimes people cannot understand themselves, and they might need another tool for them to reflect and calm down. Also for the more expressive scenarios that people like influencers want to show themselves through a live stream video. Moreover, for more intimate scenarios people want to have better communication with their partner, friends, or family, where they feel safe to share their emotional status.

Future Work and Envisionments

With the popularization of personal smart devices, our life on digital platforms has become a new reality. People incessantly create and consume online content such as social media posts and live streams. The coronavirus pandemic has expedited this process. As more social events have transformed online, digital identities have not been second to real identities. It is presumable to overlay virtual fashion on the physical garment and separate their functions for events happening and content posted in the digital world. Physical clothing may only be functional as protection layers and responsible for wearing comfortably, and virtual fashion will take charge of its decoration and self-expression properties.

Emoshion will not exist on small screens forever but will merge into reality in the near future. The development of wearable AR will soon mix virtual fashion with our physical self. Through this lens, we will show our distinctive characteristics and express our unique identities.

Conclusion

We hope we can provide a new perspective of digital fashion for creators and also users to use another way to think about self-identity and representation. And also bring the discussion about emotion visualization to help people better understand themselves or communicate with each other.
