Abstract

To get the most out of computers, human-machine interfaces should ideally use a language that resembles what humans already use. Unfortunately, most traditional soft­ ware deploys a highly abstract and low-level syntax that is designed to be easily understood by a computer but not by a person. This makes computer-aided design inaccessible and inefficient.

Moving through disentangled latent vector spac­ es of generative deep learning networks allows us to inde­ pendently manipulate a vast amount of fuzzy high-level pa­ rameters that can inform an equally large amount of design decisions the way humans naturally do.

This thesis proposes a graphical user interface and high-degrees-of-freedom hardware controller to simul­ taneously control an arbitrary amount of user-defined pa­ rameters for semantic image editing with generative adver­ sarial networks. The result is a system that can precisely edit synthetic images with fuzzy text prompts, allowing people with limited technical knowledge to utilize their rich natural language abilities to iteratively design complex imagery with unprecedented speed in a non-destructive manner.

1 MOTIVATION

The complex nature of how humans experience reality allows them to precisely communicate highly nuanced concepts. A musician may describe a composition as “wild and ambitious, young and free” or a cymbal as “dry” or “wet”. Likewise, an art critic could claim a painting to be “misogy­ nist” or “unsettling’, and a fashion designer may view a dress as either “progressive” or “nostalgic”. The sheer amount of combined emotions, tastes, and shared experiences that can serve as easily interpretable analogies allow people to artic­ ulate ideas with tremendous precision. Due to shared human experiences, many cultures naturally associate “warm” tones, colors, or personalities as comforting and pleasant, while “cold” things are disheartening, distant, and provocative, re­ gardless of whether the object in question can actually have a temperature. Such terminologies are here considered “fuzzy” and “high-level” as they are representational phrases that cannot be objectively connected to a single property.

The ability to communicate with “fuzzy” language is crucial for co-creating complex artifacts with other hu­ mans and machines. This can be illustrated with an imagined interaction between an architect and a client planning a mod­ ern museum at a port. The client has a specific vision for the style of the desired building but lacks the ability to express it in a concrete way with objective low-level parameters like ex­ act measurements. Instead of presenting the architect with a floor plan or 3D model, the client would rather vocally de­ scribe their idea as a “flowing silhouette with a facade shining like the waves of the surrounding water”. This single sentence directly informs a large range of decisions the architect has to make, from the appearance of the building, over material choice, to the layout of the building even though the client did not explicitly specify any of these factors.

This highly efficient way of communication can also benefit people who browse artifacts rather than create them. An obscure yet successful example can be found in a recent trend on the video-sharing platform YouTube. Here, some us­ ers are compiling music lists where the chosen tracks are not aligned by artist or genre but by a specific emotion they evoke. To communicate the content of the playlist, the creators give them highly-abstracted titles such as “this playlist will make you feel like a greek goddess in a ruin garden” – a collection of dreamy piano pieces and enchanting lullabies. A playlist titled “You’re in love with the villain of the story” consists of

tragic classics full of gloomy strings while “random burst of energy at 2am” is a compilation of bright, noisy, and intense electronic hyperpop.

Although these metaphorical titles are discon­ nected from any objective properties of the chosen music, they still manage to be highly descriptive. When combined with a thumbnail that visually encompasses the selected at­ mosphere, such forms of describing music can convey the acoustic content significantly better than the titles of the music pieces or the names of the artists.

Traditional design software, in contrast, cannot in­ terpret such language as they instead operate with low-level syntaxes that can take years to master. This comes at great expense and inaccessibility. The previously mentioned fic­ tional architect, for example, would have to work together with skilled 3D artists that tenaciously translate the client’s fuzzy description into cartesian coordinates of digital verti­ ces, normal maps of virtual materials, or integers that deter­ mine the angle of some object in a 3D software. The ability to express an idea through images and text with a computer is thus reserved for an elite that has the resources required to learn and practice computer-aided creation.

2. SEMANTIC IMAGE GENERATION WITH DEEP LEARNING

Recent leaps in generative deep learning, how­ ever, have revealed that even self-supervised models can automatically learn representations of high-level parame­ ters. Such models are trained on large datasets, often imag­ es, which they can reproduce after a long training process. Generative adversarial networks, or GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014), variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013), and diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 07--09 Jul 2015; Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Ramesh et al. 2022) are among the most successful types of generative frameworks, capable of creating completely novel images of faces, cars, and landscapes that are virtually indistin­ guishable from real ones.

Despite revolutionizing the way computers gen­ erate imagery, the random nature of the synthesis made them unsuitable for controlled design processes where the machine has to follow the intentions of a human designer.

Recently, (Radford et al. 18--24 Jul 2021) intro­ duced the highly influential Contrastive Language-Image

Pretraining (CLIP) model, a neural network trained on 400 million image-text pairs to predict how related a text descrip­ tion is to an image.

CLIP greatly accelerated research on semantic im­ age synthesis. When combined with a generative framework, it can allow users to generate an image from a text prompt describing the desired image (Ramesh et al. 18--24 Jul 2021). By using CLIP as a discriminator rating generated images against the text prompt, a system can gradually optimize for this rating until a satisfactory image is found.

Unfortunately, there is no single image that unique­ ly satisfies a text description unless the prompt is exceeding­ ly long and specific. However, even if this is the case, design­ ers naturally want to adjust a result to explore multiple design directions or to incorporate changes that a collaborator or the designer itself desires. The limitations of communication and interactive tools already prevent a human designer from perfectly interpreting the intentions of another collaborating human. In some cases, a person may even fail to be satisfied with a creation of their own even if it suits their original inten­ tion, as the human imagination often lacks the resolution of a concrete artifact. Assuming that a machine can simply gener­ ate a perfect image from a single input is therefore unrealistic.

Digital design tools must therefore allow for itera­ tive adjustments. The randomness and inability to gradually edit parts of a resulting image make simple text-to-image approaches insufficient no matter their ability to interpret a target description.

3 DISENTANGLEMENT OF LATENT VECTOR SPACES

A breakthrough came with the observation of disentangled characteristics of the high-dimensional latent vector spaces of GANs (Chen et al. 2016; Esser, Rombach, and Ommer 2020; Lin et al. 2019; Kazemi, Iranmanesh, and Nasrabadi 2019). Disentanglement refers to the indepen­ dence of semantically meaningful parameters inside be­ spoke latent space. If such a space is disentangled, it tends to have spatial directions that exclusively affect individual properties of the generated output. Moving along such a di­ rection can correspond to the change in the hair length of a generated face or the color of an artificial car. Further obser­ vations revealed that this also includes fuzzy parameters like the “sportiness” of a car, the “happiness” of a face, or even

the degree to which an artificial person looks like Taylor Swift. This opened up the possibility to independently edit a vast amount of parameters by simply moving along their re­ spective dimensions in the latent vector space.

4 STYLECLIP GLOBAL DIRECTIONS

Finding and labeling semantically meaningful di­ rections remained a challenge. Initially, this process either required manual inspection and annotation or pre-trained classifiers. Both severely limit the number of accessible pa­ rameters.

In their paper “StyleCLIP’, Patashnik et al. (2021) demonstrate that directions in the high-dimensional vector space of CLIPs pre-trained neural networks could be trans­ posed to the vector space of a GAN. This idea is spawned from the assumption that despite inherent differences be­ tween a vector space of text embeddings and a vector space of image embeddings, both can share semantically mean­ ingful global directions that have high cosine similarity. The manifolds of CLIP’s text embeddings and image embeddings could thus be normalized to allow a user to map the direction Δt, representing a direction from a neutral to a target text prompt, from CLIP’s language-image embedding space to StyleGAN’s (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras, Laine, et al. 2020) stylespace S. In theory, this finding allows a user to vi­ sually manipulate a GAN-based image with many thousands of semantic parameters that CLIP encodes.

The unique advantage of these “global” directions is the ability to universally change images in real-time with a nearly unlimited amount of text prompts. In contrast, lossbased optimization usually requires gradient descent over many generated images until a satisfactory one is found, essentially brute-forcing the way to a target. This can take minutes and is therefore unsuitable for a rapid iterative de­ sign process. Other control systems, such as latent mappers (Patashnik et al. 2021), are limited to a preset number of pa­ rameters. This inhibits the advantage of using deep learning for media editing, as conventional software systems already offer a range of precise parameters by manually engineering a desired programmatic function.

Allowing users to spontaneously utilize thousands of “fuzzy” seman­ tic parameters with minimal preprocessing has been previously unheard of in the world of computational image processing. Discoveries like global directions for semantic image editing mark a milestone in the pursuit of aligning the interfaces of computational design systems with traditional human-human communication.

5 A GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE FOR RAPID SEMANTIC IMAGE GENERATION AND EDITING

To make the advantages of StyleCLIP accessible to designers and artists, I developed a dynamic graphical user interface (GUI). Similar to the GUI that Patashnik et al. (2021) propose, users can enter a neutral prompt and a tar­ get prompt. The former determines the visual content of the GAN-generated base image while the latter describes the desired change of the target image. Users can determine the intensity α of this change, as well as how many aspects of the image should be changed with it through the threshold pa­ rameter β. A high β threshold will only touch the most relevant parts of the base image. For example, when manipulating the target prompt “brown eyes” on an artificial face with a high β value, only the color of the iris will change, while a low β val­ ue may also affect the nose, wrinkles, and even the gaze of the face. The broad nature of some target prompts may re­ quire a low β threshold by default. When a face is supposed to look more “surprised’, for example, StyleCLIP would ide­ ally change a range of visual elements, including raising eye­ brows, adding wrinkles on the forehead, and opening the mouth.

6 CONVENTIONAL INTERFACES LIMIT DEEP LEARNING BASED IMAGE EDITING

Having access to a large number of arbitrary vari­ ables renders traditional controllers like mice and cursors insufficient. The use of such traditional interfaces makes im­ age synthesis with systems like GauGAN (Park et al. 2019), DALL-E (Ramesh et al. 18--24 Jul 2021), or even StyleCLIP’s GUI hard to use and inefficient. GauGAN requires the user to draw semantic masks that get translated into a photorealistic style. This process is tedious with an inaccurate touchpad or mouse and only works well with domains that do not require

GauGAN’s graphical user interface. A user has to paint a sim­ ple semantic segmentation on the left side and can translate the compo­ sition into a range of photorealistic styles as seen on the right half.

precise masks such as landscapes. While it replicates the widespread use of sketches as a form of communication, it does not allow to iterate the result with fuzzy parameters that apply to the overall appearance rather than clearly defined parts of the image. Systems like DALL-E are outstanding at generating images that fit even highly specific text prompts. However, editing is limited to the binary presence of objects in bespoke prompts. A gradual control over the intensity of parameters does not exist. Additionally, each change re­ quires the user to type in a new text, making an iterative de­ sign process mentally demanding due to the effort associat­ ed with typing on a keyboard. StyleCLIP already offers a GUI to change a single prompt with a single pair of α and β slider. The interface consists of just one slider which may change a parameter that conveys a multitude of visual aspects but is still limiting as it requires a prompt to contain every desired change. Controlling the individual intensity of each of these changes is also not supported. Lastly, interfaces usually rely on a cursor that can only be at one place at a time. This slows the design process down further by making simultaneous control of multiple parameters impossible.

These limitations are detrimental to the user experience because of the uncertain nature of how artificial intelligence creates output. Due to the novel­ ty of writing to a computer what it should design, users often feel overwhelmed as they expect a clear syntax, the way they are used to from conventional software.

More importantly, it is often not given that a system actually interprets input the way the user intends to. Targeted image generation with deep learning, therefore, requires speculation and a lot of iteration. In fact, many semantic inter­ faces for generative models have unpredictable preferences for specific phrases and grammar while the models themselves have significant limits to what they are able to generate in the first place. Combined, these factors create a need for sys­ tems that allow designers to quickly experiment with different target prompts and their intensity to achieve an intuitive, rapid, and precise design process.

7 A HIGH DOF CONTROLLER FOR SEMANTIC IMAGE EDITING

Given the sheer amount of possible parameters that can be manipulated with generative models, interfac­ es must therefore allow users to quickly specify and edit a large set of parameters in parallel. I propose the use of input controllers with high degrees of freedom (DOF) as a solu­ tion to this problem. A high-DOF system allows its user to independently control multiple inputs simultaneously. This project proposes a system that accepts MIDI sliders, tradi­ tionally used in music production, to simultaneously control the α values of multiple user-defined semantic parameters. The overall system consists of a MIDI controller with five hardware sliders and five knobs, connected to a computer via USB. A graphical user interface, visually resembling that slider, is displayed on a monitor where a user can enter a tar­ get prompt for each slider. There, sliders can be added and removed dynamically.

Once a prompt has been entered, the correspond­ ing hardware slider will control how prominent that parame­ ter is in the edited image by adjusting StyleCLIP’s α. A graph­ ic knob on top of each slider determines the β threshold. If multiple parameters are used, each global direction matrix is computed, added together, and normalized. A change in a slider will trigger this computation, generate an image, en­ code it, and send it to the web frontend in real-time.

The visual domain of the generated image can be selected by choosing from a list of pre-trained StyleGAN 2 (Karras, Laine, et al. 2020) models. A new random image is generated each time a user clicks on one of the models.

The PixelAlchemist GUI in use. Four sliders are active and con­ trol the amount of trees and weather in the generated image, as well as the materiality and size of the church.

StyleCLIP global directions can target very specific properties of an image, like the color of a car. The prompt “BMW” may add a kidney grille to an artificial car as it is a distinctive visual feature of that brand.

8 PRETRAINED MODELS

These models include faces, cars, landscapes, portrait paintings, and modern graphic design posters. Each dataset requires a few hours of preprocessing on a GPU such as an NVIDIA P100. The custom design poster dataset has been trained on 7445 hand-selected posters from profes­ sional designers and studios1 using two NVIDIA A100 GPUs and a StyleGAN 2 architecture with adaptive discriminator augmentation (Karras, Aittala, et al. 2020).

The visual designs of the real posters are distinc­ tively experimental and feature complex compositions with high degrees of asymmetry and diverse color palettes. I choose this type of data for two reasons. First, to foreshad­ ow possible applications for a conventional designer, and second, to showcase the unique ability of deep neural net­ works to identify and reproduce latent patterns that usually require human mastery. Designing a poster according to the high standards of professional artists requires years of de­ veloping the right aesthetic intuition as it goes well beyond aligning forms on primary axes.

Due to the high visual complexity of the already limited data, the generated posters have low fidelity and mostly generate abstract shapes. As generative models begin to be able to reproduce typography, this quality issue should be partly resolved in the future.

For more robust datasets, StyleCLIP is capable of adjusting a large range of parameters. Using the LSUN churches dataset, one can change how prominent “gothic” architecture is in the generated building, how many trees are visible, or whether the facade is made of bricks. A user can either only change the color of a generated car by utilizing a high β threshold while leaving the base image untouched, or make a whole design look more like a “sports car” or a “van”. Interestingly, the system is able to distill complex design pat­ terns. When the prompt “BMW” is used with a high β thresh­ old on a car, the output only splits the front grill in two. This is called a “kidney grille”, a detail which serves as the signature design feature of BMW cars.

Next page: A grid of artificial posters generated with a Style­ GAN2 ADA model trained on graphic design posters.

Noteworthy is also the ability to move in the oppo­ site direction of a text prompt by applying a negative α val­ ue. This applies the opposite effect of whatever prompt the user entered and thus offers an even more nuanced way of instructing the generator. Imagine a car designer who has gotten the feedback that their design looks too “sporty”. The designer could type in the prompt “sports car” and simply apply a negative value. The unique advantage I propose with PixelAlchemist is the use of multiple parameters in parallel. A designer can dynamically add and remove any of the pre­ viously mentioned parameters and iteratively adjust each individual slider. This creates a new design process where a designer has to first, think of text prompts that serve as se­ mantic building blocks describing the output and second, gradually adjust the impact of each of these building blocks to their liking.

9 SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE

Making the system accessible to a wide audience with little effort was a primary goal of this project. The soft­ ware runs on a self-contained google colab notebook which provides the code, a ready-to-use software environment, and the computer hardware necessary to run it. A flask serv­ er delivers a dynamically generated HTML file to a public webserver where a user can access the graphical web inter­ face and see generated results.

10 BIAS

The generative models utilized in this project are biased. The neural networks used in CLIP and StyleGAN can only find and reproduce rules that were present in the train­ ing data. The more a pattern is present in the training set, the more likely the GAN will recognize it as a rule and follow it during inference. A dataset that is taken from a biased world will therefore always produce biased results unless exhaus­ tive measurements are taken to remove these biases from the data or counter them in the learning architecture. This bias is especially visible when generating human faces. The target prompt “Asian”, for example, tends to create a face wearing glasses when a low β threshold is applied. The po­ tential for harmful effects caused by amplifying biases with

deep learning also applies to this project. I attempt to limit this potential by adding a highlighted note to the GUI of my system whenever a user selects a face-generating dataset. While this does not remove all potential for harm, it still chal­ lenges users claiming that the generated results provide fun­ damental truths about society.

The hardware setup of PixelAlchemist. A MIDI slider array connects to a laptop running the Google Colab notebook.

11 DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

GANs require huge amounts of data and can­ not produce accurate results unless that data has a strong commonality. This is an important reason why GANs are tra­ ditionally benchmarked with human faces as they are sym­ metric with relatively little variance. In contrast, the LSUN car dataset cannot reliably generate realistic images of cars as it sometimes creates distorted vehicles or even unrecog­ nizable objects. The GAN model trained on posters suffered from the limited amount of real images and an extraordinarily high degree of visual diversity. This resulted in an unstable training process and abstract results. This abstraction ren­ ders many global CLIP directions ineffective.

It is important to highlight that these limitations arise solely from the availability of data and the ability of a chosen GAN to handle diverse yet small datasets. As long as research on generative frameworks continues to improve, the same approach to global directions can likely be used to achieve dramatically better results. Very large diffusion mod­ els like DALL-E 2 have recently suggested that such issues on visual diversity and quality may have already been solved.

This problem also explains the lack of suitable models that synthesize media that is actually useful to de­ signers. Human faces, while very suitable to showcase the ability of StyleGAN, are hardly relevant for most design pro­ cesses. However, once generative frameworks become good at producing high-quality results with small amounts of diverse data, we can directly integrate them into systems like PixelAlchemist to study the full potential for designers with datasets that generate floor plans, 3D models, 2D graphic layouts, and even fonts.

12 OUTLOOK

Allowing people to communicate the visual con­ cepts they imagine to a computer using natural language may significantly alter the way we design with computers. Most adult humans are already capable of verbally describ­ ing ideas in great detail with a large range of rhetorical meth­ ods. Utilizing this skill for human-computer interaction could therefore drastically lower the complexity and effort need­ ed to generate any desired image, and even text, video, au­ dio, 3D model, or trajectories of a physical robot. Traditional software has been limited either by its inability to translate fuzzy input into meaningful output or by its inability to scale due to the necessity to manually engineer every generative parameter – often both. After the deep learning systems mentioned here have solved both issues, it becomes easy to imagine that they will have a major impact on the way we design with computers.

The continued success of skeuomorphic princi­ ples in human-computer interaction suggests that future software will fluently interface with the immensely complex system we call human language. Eventually, we will likely instruct computers by referencing analogies, metaphors, and anecdotes to communicate the highly nuanced visions in our heads. PixelAlchemist is designed to be an evolving platform that not just outlines this future but one that offers primitive yet direct access to it today.

Special thanks to André Felipe and Flávia Menezes from typo/graphic posters for supporting this project with data, my father, mother, and sisters for their continued support through challenging times, and my beloved friends from Berke­ ley who have been my most valuable resource over the past two years.
