Abstract

2 The Bestiary of Invisible Zoo. It stands as the embodiment of the interplay between human

imagination and artificial intelligence.

History and Prior Art

In a technical context, this thesis is inspired by the recent trend in

image editing methods that address the potential and challenges of

finding semantic parameters inside latent vector spaces. Well-known

GauGan[5] and DALL-E[6]. Artbreeder is a website built with StyleGAN

and BigGAN[7] and it allows user to combine and manipulate images

of landscapes, anime figures, portraits and many more kinds to

produce different variations. GauGAN is a deep learning model

which understands human doodles and turns them into realistic

landscapes. It can be a powerful tool for people to fast prototype

and make changes to their ideas. DALL·E is an image-generating

model which creates images from text captions expressed in natural

language. It demonstrates the ability to understand and render

concepts of space, time, and even logic. The connection between

semantics and the corresponding visual representations used in

DALL-E is acquired from another model called CLIP[8]. CLIP is a

zero-shot model which is trained on tremendously large datasets

on images and their captions. It has the ability to identity the

relationship between any given caption to an image and learn the

connection between textual and visual representations of objects.

CLIP is extremely powerful because it can learn semantics from

natural language and also determine the related visual concept,

which unlocks the opportunities for text-based image manipulation.

Among these examples, I identified my opportunities by the fact

that people often lack the direct control of the outcomes in an easily

understandable way as what they usually do in a human creative

process, and a good, intuitive interface for human creators to use is

generally missing.

3 GauGAN interface

Other than GANs, Recent research on image synthesis has also found

another interesting place called diffusion model, and there have been

an increasing number of popular applications built with diffusion

models such as DALL-E 2[9] and Disco Diffusion[10]. Although many

people have argued that diffusion model outperforms GANs and

is the new future of image synthesis, this thesis still focuses on the

research and application of GAN because of the richness of existing

literature and easy access to the code resources for implementation.

On the other hand, in a creative context, this thesis draws inspiration

from literature, such as the Chinese classics Shan Hai Jing[11] and

the Book of Imaginary Being[12] by Jorge Luis Borges, and artists

such as Luigi Serafini. Shan Hai Jing is a collection of Chinese

mythological beasts and landscapes as well as a cultural account

of the Chinese ancient world. It was treated as an invaluable legacy

that embodies the fantastical and magnificent imagination of the

Chinese ancestors. As I was born and raised in China, the mythical

stories from Shan Hai Jing was an indispensable part of my early

childhood and planted the seed of fantasy deep in my mind. Later on

in my life, I was also intrigued by the mythologies and literature from

all over the world across different cultures. In the Book of Imaginary

Being, Jorge Luis Borges complied the stories of 116 strange

creatures conceived through time and space by human imagination

with twenty illustrations created by Peter Sís. Luigi Serafini’s Codex

Seraphinianus[13] is another masterpiece in this category, one of the

strangest but also most beautiful encyclopedias ever existed. The

author created a window for us to look into a bizarre imaginary world

in 300 pages of descriptions written in an imaginary language. As

an artist and a designer, Serafini provides us with a speculative and

provocative vision of a reality for inexplicable forms of life. Through the

constructions of imaginary worlds and otherness, humans express

themselves and perceive the world creatively. I see that there exists

an analogy or similarity between the potentials of infinite human

imagination and the high-dimensionality space of machine learning,

and I want to draw the connection with a meaningful representation.

According to my research, although there have been many attempts

to use AI for image synthesis, they are rarely combined with

compelling storytelling and world-building.

4 Examples of human imagination in mythologies and literature: Shan Hai Jing from China, Codex

Seraphinianus by Luigi Serafini

Given the insights, this thesis is motivated by the opportunity to

leverage the benefits of interacting with high dimensional latent

spaces in deep learning and seamlessly integrate them into human

imagination and human creative process. It hopes to catalyze new

discussions around human-like communication between human and

machine intelligence within the current landscape of generative deep

learning through the construction of a playful scenario for creative

engagement. I also feel motivated to speculate and ask the following

questions about machine-augmented creativity: What is the role

of human creators while they work with AI? Where is the boundary

between what is created by the machine and what is created by the

human? Another interesting point to make is that mythologies never

have authors. We are unable to verify the origin of the myths. We just

inherit them. They existed long before we were born and even before

the world we live in was born. Such ambiguity of human evidence

opens up more possibilities for artistic exploration and speculation

on authorship and originality: Is it possible that our mythologies are

created by non-human creative agencies? If machines are able to

generate mythologies that are indistinguishable from human-written

stories, will they pass on to become the new cultural legacy for future

humanity?

Method/Approach

The approach of this thesis is to explore the high dimensional latent

space of Deep Learning and metaphorize them as a realm between

“reality” and “imagination” [14] with a poetic articulation of GANs in

order to interpret the representations in the GAN latent space with

meaningful rhetorics. It consists of two parts: an interactive human-

AI co-creative process, the Generator, and a mythical world-building

process, the Bestiary.

In the Generator, people will interact with a generative system to

provide feedback and goals on their ideal outcomes. The Bestiary is

the embodiment of the interplay between human imagination and

artificial intelligence: it will document the collaborative outcomes of

human-AI co-creation.

Process/Iterative work

To build the Generator, I investigated a few existing GAN-based image

editing methods and decided to choose StyleGAN2 ada because

of the following reasons: first, styleGan2 is able to generate highly

realistic images in a variety of domains and allows manipulations

on the generated images using the latent spaces of the models;

secondly, a recent work called StyleCLIP successfully combined the

generative ability of StyleGAN with CLIP’s image-text embedding.

This thesis will build upon the power of StyleCLIP to enable intuitive

and user-customized text-based image manipulation. To build the

Generator, I first trained a StyleGAN2 model using a customized

dataset. The dataset consists of 3896 images of animal side views

and body portraits, which I scraped from Flickr using an authorized

API. Then I trained the customized StyleGAN2 model with StyleCLIP’s

global CLIP directions and implemented a GUI developed by

my colleague Titus Ebbecke that allows people to control the

appearance of the generated beasts.

To build the Bestiary, there are three majors steps included in this

process: first, the Bestiary will take an image of the generated beast

sent from the Generator as input and apply a mythical style to it;

secondly, the Bestiary will generate a short anecdotal description of

the beast based on the image information; thirdly, the image and the

story will be added to a digital collection of mythology and together

they will create a profile for the beast. After conducting investigations

on several style transfer models, I decided to use the method called

Fast Style Transfer for Arbitrary Styles, based on the model code

and publication from Ghiasi et. al. [15]. The model allows fast artistic

style transfer that works on almost any arbitrary painting style. I also

incorporated the GPT-3 API in the Bestiary for text generation and

mythical world-building.  All the code for building Invisible Zoo was

written using Python and Flask in Google Colaboratory.

5  A grid view of the unreal animals generated by StyleGAN 2 ADA using a customized dataset.

6 Diagram on the implementation of Invisible Zoo.

Through the process and iteration, I identified a few challenges in

different phases of the development. First, because training a GAN

requires tremendously large amounts of computational power, I ran

the training instances using GPUs (2 Nvidia A100) through a virtual

machine on the Google Cloud Platform. Due to the high cost of

powerful GPUs and our limited budgets, the model only got to train for

20 hours and therefore the performance is not ideal. Secondly, there

have been many back-and-forth thoughts on the image stylization

methods and aesthetics. The style I want to create is mythical and

nonphotorealistic, either like an old painting or a pen sketch. I tried

two distinctive approaches: fast style transfer using deep neural

networks and sketch image processing using OpenCV. The style

transfer approach generates images that look more similar to an old

bestiary with more interesting and granular details of the beast. But

the con is that it does not have a consistent performance: it works

perfectly with images that have a clear background and fewer details

but not with the opposite. The OpenCV approach creates images that

are cleaner and more contemporary rather than mythical. But the pro

is that it produces more consistent results across the image dataset.

After several versions of iterations and discussion with different

people, I decide to move on with the fast style transfer because it

aligns more closely with the theme of myth and imagination. The last

and the greatest challenge of this thesis is on the questions of how

to engineer every part of the process together. The final system of

Invisible Zoo should connect the Generator and the Bestiary and, at

the same time, allows continuous inference for the image generation,

which again requires powerful GPUs. The solution I used is to have

both the Generator GUI and the Bestiary interface in Google Colab

and render the two front-end websites using Flask-ngrok.

The final design of Invisible Zoo is an interactive installation that

allows people to create imaginary beasts and mythical stories. The

installation comprises two parts, the Generator and the Bestiary,

which are displayed through a TV monitor and an iPad respectively.

The Generator is an interactive web-based system built with a pre-

trained customized StyleGAN2 model on animal datasets. It allows

people to manipulate the outcome of a generated beast by manually

specifying a prompt that they want to achieve. On the left part of the

TV monitor screen, people will see a knob, a slider, and a text entry

box, vertically aligned with each other. The audience can enter a target

prompt for each slider and then control how much of the image will

be changed with respect to the prompt via moving the slider. People

can also adjust how drastic the change will be, or the intensity of

the change, by moving the knob on the top. On the right part of the

monitor, the image of the generated beast will be displayed in real-

time in response to any changes made. For example, if people want

to have more elements of cat for their beast, they can type “cat” in the

text entry box and adjust the slider and knob according to what they

observe in the real-time image synthesis.

7 The system interface of the Generator.

8 The system interface of the Bestiary.

After composing their ideal beast, the audience moves on to the

Bestiary. The Bestiary serves as the most comprehensive collection

of the beasts living in the Invisible Zoo. All of them are created by

curious human beings together with artificial intelligence. On the iPad

screen, people will see a digital mythology book with an image and

a short paragraph of anecdote for each beast. They can flip through

the book to unlock the whole collection. Once the audience clicks

the “archive” button on the iPad screen, the Bestiary system will first

apply a mythical style to the image that is currently displayed on the

TV monitor. And then, according to the information that the audience

provides through the prompt, the system will generate a short story

with an embedded GPT-3 API. By these means, the audience is ready

to archive the beast to the digital myth book so they can no longer be

invisible.

Discussion

During the final critique presentation, I saw many people were excited

about trying Invisible Zoo and wanted to contribute to the Bestiary

with their personalized mythical beasts. Because the project as

implemented is limited by relatively constrained access to GPU

compute power and constrained time for software development,

the whole interactive pipeline remains a simplified proof-of-concept

version of a larger project. Right now the generative model is not

robust enough to have consistently good performance across any

text prompt. Additionally, both systems are hosted on Google Colab

and the communication between the systems is through Google

Drive, so at this moment, the process of achieving the animal from the

Generator to the Bestiary is not optimized and is very inefficient. While

the current implementation of Invisible Zoo does not actually support

collective inputs on a large scale, it surely has the potential to face a

larger public audience.

There are also interesting discussions around the theme of

mythology. I feel encouraged by the fact that people get excited and

enjoy seeing the unexpected and playful absurdity that deviates

slightly from their common perception and walks on the fine line of

their epistemological boundaries. In this case, it is the animals that

look familiar yet are not realistic. Additionally, there has been much

feedback on how personal the audience felt about the story created

in this context. Some stated that the Bestiary invoked many valuable

memories that they had with their parents and how the power of myth

and narratives can reflect and trace the history and value of a family

and a culture.

Future Work and Envisionments

As a designer and an HCI researcher, I am passionate about

designing novel interactions and curating digital experiences to

better support and extend human creativity. I will continue to work on

Invisible Zoo and the immediate next step is to solve the engineering

issues and make it a public platform. I will also try to get more access

to GPUs and continue to improve the robustness of my StyleGAN

model. I want Invisible Zoo to be collective speculation on the

nature of machine-augmented human imagination and raise some

important questions that deserve more attention and consideration:

Can AI make people more creative? Is it possible that machines will

become the subject of creative work while designers or artists only

provide feedback and action to them? Is it possible that artificial

intelligence, with its potential in creative practice, will ultimately shift

our understanding and definition of creativity?

Conclusion

In Invisible Zoo, people can create imaginary beasts and their

mythical stories with the assistance of an AI co-creator. As a designer

and HCI researcher, I investigated on the interplay between human

imagination and machine intelligence and proposed an attempt to

go beyond the traditional creative process in the context of human-

AI co-creation. By mediating the conversation between humans and

artificial intelligence, this thesis aims to translate and communicate

insights from human imagination and high-dimensional deep

learning networks and challenge the epistemological boundaries

of both sides. Through the construction of a playful scenario, where

humans make conversations with machines, Invisible Zoo stands as

a reflection of the ambiguity, autonomy, authorship, and originality in

9 The final setup of Invisible Zoo: the Generator and the Bestiary, displayed through a TV monitor

and an iPad respectively.

Reference

1. Davis, N.M., Hsiao, C., Popova, Y., & Magerko, B. (2015). An Enactive

Model of Creativity for Computational Collaboration and Co-creation.

Creativity in the Digital Age.

2. Karras, T., Aittala, M., Hellsten, J., Laine, S., Lehtinen, J., & Aila, T. (2020).

Training Generative Adversarial Networks with Limited Data. ArXiv,

abs/2006.06676.

3. Brown, T.B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P.,

Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-

Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T.J., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D.M.,

Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray, S.,

Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I.,

& Amodei, D. (2020). Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. ArXiv,

abs/2005.14165.

4. https://www.artbreeder.com/

5. Park, T., Liu, M., Wang, T., & Zhu, J. (2019). Semantic Image Synthesis

With Spatially-Adaptive Normalization. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2332-2341.

6. Ramesh, A., Pavlov, M., Goh, G., Gray, S., Voss, C., Radford, A., Chen,

M., & Sutskever, I. (2021). Zero-Shot Text-to-Image Generation. ArXiv,

abs/2102.12092.

7. Brock, A., Donahue, J., & Simonyan, K. (2019). Large Scale

GAN Training for High Fidelity Natural Image Synthesis. ArXiv,

abs/1809.11096.

8. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S.,

Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., & Sutskever, I.

(2021). Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language

Supervision. ICML.

9. Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C., & Chen, M. (2022).

Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents.

ArXiv, abs/2204.06125..

10. https://github.com/alembics/disco-diffusion

11. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classic_of_Mountains_and_Seas

12. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Imaginary_Beings

13. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Seraphinianus

14. Grba, D. (2022). Deep Else: A Critical Framework for AI Art.

15. Ghiasi, G., Lee, H., Kudlur, M., Dumoulin, V., & Shlens, J. (2017).

Exploring the structure of a real-time, arbitrary neural artistic

stylization network. ArXiv, abs/1705.06830.
