Abstract

As the technological landscape in the United States evolves, people are increasingly relying on informational technologies such as smartphones, tablets, and computers for social connection [1]. However, many of these opportunities to connect with the outside world with the aforementioned technologies are not always accessible to nonverbal or minimally speaking (Ms) individuals [2]. In this study, I focus on adopting augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) devices that support the picture exchange com­ munication system (PECS) for Ms individuals.

In traditional AAC devices, Ms individuals share their physical devices with trained communication partners (Tps). Recent industry advances in AAC are minimal and focus on teaching Ms children spoken languages [3]. For Ms adults, significant barriers exist when adopting AAC devices because they do not effectively bridge the gap be­ tween Ms individuals and relationships outside of Tps. Despite technological advance­ ments, communicating with AAC devices are often passive events and cumbersome to operate [4]. Designed as medical devices, traditional AAC devices are commonly used in speech therapy and as prompts between Ms individuals and their respective care teams [5].

The objective of this study is threefold. First, participants evaluate Proloquo2Go, an AAC designed for Ms individuals [6]. Their reflections highlight user experience (UX) and user interface (UI) improvements to Prologuo2Go and other traditional AAC tech­ nologies. Second, I develop Euphemia, a beta iOS application. Euphemia connects various ways of communicating without speech including hand gestures, vocalizations, and generated images with both physical PECS icon books and AAC devices. This application challenges augmented reality (AR) and machine learning (ML) integrations in AAC devices. Lastly, I utilize a mixed-method approach with User Experience Ques­ tionnaire (UEQ) and Usability Testing. Data gathered through interviews conducted during and after usability testing determines how intrusive or unintrusive modern tech­ nological tools can be integrated and adapted into users’ lives. Future studies will focus on implementing user feedback for the second iteration of Euphemia.

There is an urgent need to continuously innovate AAC devices to (1) give Ms individ­ uals the opportunity to voice, exchange, and listen to each other’s opinions, and (2) challenge what inclusive and meaningful conversation looks like between users and non-users of AAC devices. This study pushes to empower nonverbal communication and represents a contribution to the advancement of accessible technologies.

History and Prior Art

Inclusion in communities is the human right to participation and access to environ­ ments, public transportation, information, and all public services and policies [7]. Ac­ cording to the United Nations, 6.25 billion people, or 15% of people with disabilities are expected to be residing in urban areas in 2050 [8]. This paper will address nonverbal interactions and contributions of voice in social settings amongst nonverbal or mini­ mally speaking (Ms) individuals and their communities [2]. Ms individuals include those diagnosed with developmental disabilities including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), Down Syndrome, and cerebral palsy [9].

Current communication solutions for Ms individuals are known as augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) technologies [10]. AAC technologies are dedicated technological devices that include different ways people communicate without spoken languages [10]. Despite barriers to utilizing AAC as an unbiased communication de­ vice, prior research has proven that AACs make an instrumental difference in the lives of Ms individuals [11]. AAC methods followed three main threads of development [12]. First, the development of early electromechanical communication and writing systems [12]. Second, child language development research [12]. Third, communication devel­ opment and language boards [12]. Until the 60s and 70s, these fields developed sep­ arately until AAC technologies were officially termed [12]. The utilization of computers and other technological tools were groundbreaking for AACs [12]. With AAC technol­ ogies, Ms individuals can achieve “a higher degree of independence and success [...] due to technological advances [13]. AAC technologies with augmented reality (AR) and machine learning (ML) integrations are, for the most part, unexplored [14].

Studies have highlighted that Ms individuals benefit from visual and audio stimuli [14]. A solution for Ms individuals includes the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), developed in 1985 by Andy Bondy and Lari Frost [15]. PECS is a visual-based AAC system designed for trained communication professionals/partners (Tps) to teach speech to Ms children in a classroom or home setting [15]. Tps are characterized as personal relationships such as family members, friendships, teachers, psychiatrists, therapists, or other relationships with a shared understanding of a Ms individual’s unique language. Ms individuals are prompted with a set of images and asked to give Tps the icon image [15]. PECS serves users with a specific set of needs with no age prerequisites and limitations [15]. While PECS is common and effective in developing speech and vocabulary with Ms children, it is not limited to any age range [15].

In “‘It’s got to be more than that’. Parents and speech-language pathologists discuss training content for families with a new speech generating device,” a parent of an Mv individual, “pointed out the irony that successful AAC interventions often rely heavily on the communication of team members other than the child” [16]. AAC technologies are

designed with long setup processes for parents and caregivers to Ms individuals. Tps are also tasked with the long-term responsibility of creating and removing vocabulary words for Ms individuals. In the research study, they state: “Several participants cau­ tioned that in an ideal world, parents should not be expected to manage the onerous tasks of vocabulary management and language goal setting alone [16]. Could there be AAC solutions that go beyond pointing at PECS icons and incorporate various methods of nonverbal communication? In everyday interactions, Ms individuals use a mixture of methods to communicate outside of AAC technologies and PECS icons. Many com­ municate with a mixture of methods and solutions [2]. This includes gestures, vocaliza­ tions, body language, and many other nonverbal communication methods [2]. What if the next generation of AAC devices blended nonverbal communication methods that can be used by Ms individuals to communicate with relationships beyond their direct contacts and Tps? This paper characterizes personal relationships as close friendships or relationships in a Ms individual’s direct circle. Such individuals include family mem­ bers, friends, and other intimate relationships with a shared understanding of each other’s communication needs. Any relationship outside of personal relationships will be referenced as nonpersonal relationships.

Adaptive and Accessible User Interface (UI) and User Experience (UX) Practices: When it comes to web and mobile development, technical and design standards are foundational in making accessible products with effective usability practices [17]. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) brings accessibility to the web through law man­ date. According to the W3C, accessibility supports social inclusion for people with and without disabilities to “not exclude people from using their products and services” [19]. Accessibility encompasses the opportunity for people with disabilities to “perceive, un­ derstand, navigate, and interact with websites and tools, and that they can contribute equally without barriers” [17, 18]. Director and inventor of the W3C, Tim Berners-Lee sums up the importance of accessible UI practices, “The power of the Web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless of disability is an essential aspect” [18]. UI practices include various ways of displaying content such as additional text-alternatives for non-text content and captions for multimedia [18]. Various ways of distinguishing to improve visual and audio accessibility include high contrast between foregrounds and backgrounds, color identification, resizable and enlarged text, and images with text descriptions. As for the UX of mobile and web applications, it is important that appli­ cations look intuitive at first glance and operate in comfortable ways. The US General Services Administration provides a robost guide on UX practices for accessibility that aligns with W3C’s accessibility guidelines [19]. The guide provides links to resources and personas for accessible UX. It mentions the importance of accommodating assis­ tive technologies and keyboards to navigate any interactive element in a digital product [19]. UI should be consistent throughout the application and if interactions are con­ fusion, instructions or other suggestions for guidance should be provided [19]. Touch targets on touch screens should be large and easy to each [19]. Forms should ac­ commodate users who may benefit from seeing prior information and instructions [19].

Lastly, navigation shortcuts should support the user in efficiently navigating sections of the app [19].

Augmented Reality (AR) and AAC technologies: As of 2022, technological tools with AR integrations in AAC technologies remain unexplored [17]. Studies have shown that AR has supported Ms individuals in creating new social experiences in 3D virtual en­ vironments, growing social and language skills, and expressing nonverbal cues [20, 21]. These nonverbal cues such as emotions and movement, support Ms individuals in maintaining focus [21]. AR has enabled users of AAC technologies to connect learn­ ing content in three-dimensional digital spaces with physical objects [20]. Researchers exploring the intersection of AAC and AR are investigating the receptiveness of AR in traditional AAC approaches and engagement with these platforms [20]. An important application of AAC and AR includes serious gaming. According to “Augmented Re­ ality, Serious Games and Picture Exchange Communication System for People with ASD” designing PECS applications with AR technology is an important application, “The results also indicated an improvement in the ability of verbal communication” [17]. Limitations to applying AR to serious gaming for Ms individuals include the lack of efficient integration with the PECS approach [17]. Smart glasses utilized during the studies proved to be beneficial in focusing visual attention while learning during serious gaming. However smart glasses are unable to accommodate visual impairments of all Ms individuals [17]. As AR accessibility continues to expand, developing AAC devices aligned to the needs of each unique individual is important in supporting special educa­ tion [21]. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) AAC Research and Practice: HCI research projects in this domain focus on designing for children and elderly adults with disabilities. Such projects are essential in understanding the connection between human-centered de­ sign and technological development. Research institutions such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Lab have been exploring the space of personal robots as AAC alternatives. “Commalla” is a research project focused on creating a labeling application that analyzes the vocalizations of Ms individuals to understand their intended messages and effects [2]. Utilizing ML models to interpret and classify these models, the data was based on categories determined by a primary caregiver’s understanding of the vocalizations [2]. Another application of AAC and HCI includes the exploration of personal robots as AAC tools. Social robots are important tools in explor­ ing the depths of social and emotional communication [22]. Social robotics opens the doors of investigating how deep learning can help Tps recognize emotion and expres­ sion in Ms individuals. MIT Media Lab’s study focused on comparing a social robot and its customized application with existing AAC tools through storytelling. First, research­ ers prompt Ms children in listening to stories with the two communication tools [22]. Then, the research asks Ms children to tell others stories with the same communication tools [22]. The “Text-to-Motion” project is another important application of machine learning tools [23]. After training their attention model on a billion tweets, researchers

investigate how their application can convert text inputs and spoken audio into motion movements [23]. The final output is a trained linear classifier with DeepMoji and long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to create animations from a robot.

Proloquo2Go, The Gold Standard in AAC solutions: Proloquo2Go is recognized as the gold standard in AAC solutions by parents, therapists, and teachers [6]. Developed by AssistiveWare, Proloquo2Go is a key leader in revolutionizing AAC technologies by developing AAC as a software application and marketing it as an affordable alternative to dedicated AAC devices [11]. Proloquo2Go brought accessibility to AAC technologies through iPads and iPhones. Currently, it runs on Apple watches, phones, and tables. Proloquo2Go focuses on 200-400 core words, their library of 25,000 symbols, and voices that read out each symbol to give users unable to speak a voice [6]. Each icon is available for customization and individuality in images. Their main objective is to build language skills in children learning how to speak with parent/teacher guidance.

Limitations of Traditional AAC solutions: Prior research has reported that, “approxi­ mately 30% of people who use AAC do not consistently use their devices, resulting in device abandonment” [24]. Abandonment is defined as situations where Ms individuals and Tps discontinue the use of AAC devices whether they still need it or not [25]. Con­ tributors of AAC device abandonment include “a poor support system, negative atti­ tudes toward the device by the user and/or family, an incompatible AAC system fit for the user, failure to maintain and adjust the system, and lack of proper training on how to operate the device” [24]. The low number of AAC users and the lack of Tps with AAC results in a small AAC community [26]. This limits conversations and friendships for Ms individuals and makes receiving training and support with AAC devices difficult [26]. Traditional AAC solutions are not always accessible to the individuals who need them most. Families with Mv individuals experience hardship in retrieving access to assistive technologies such as dedicated AAC devices [27]. This barrier is due to educators and service providers holding the “power to provide or deny access to vital resources” [27].

Euphemia, User-Centered iOS Application: Euphemia is a prototype of a communica­ tion application designed for iPhones with iOS 16.0 and above. Its objective is to bridge verbal and nonverbal communication between Ms users and nonusers of AAC mobile applications. It explores how the iPhone as a whole can be used to capture nonverbal communication and challenges the efficiency of traditional AAC approaches. It serves to encourage digital and physical spaces that are receptive to nonverbal exchanges. This is especially essential because current AAC applications can improve its influence on nonpersonal relationships. This is important because the fundamentals of commu­ nication - listening and speaking help facilitates inclusive communities and empathy towards people with various language needs.

Euphemia is unique in approaching how nonverbal communication is experienced. While traditional AAC devices focus on teaching speech as part of special education,

Euphemia’s goal is to be an AAC that is established into all aspects everyday life and obtainable for anyone with a smartphone. The focus on Euphemia is not solely to en­ hance communication skills for Ms individuals in educational and training settings. The main mission for Euphemia is to create communication opportunities and rethink con­ versation experiences between any AAC user and non-user. For example, Euphemia aims to connect a Ms individual who communicates via gestures, vocalizations, and PECS and an English speaker with no experience with dedicated AAC devices. Euphe­ mia, like traditional AACs, can serve as interventions and talkers. Euphemia exists as one of many avenues of communication for Ms individuals and anyone communicating nonverbally. It is an AAC designed to be used in conjunction with other technological devices and fully integrated into the phone, not just a standalone AAC mobile applica­ tion.

My motivation comes from my want to further understand my sister, whom is nonver­ bal. Throughout my life, I have witnessed how she was ignored and judged for her differences. After seeing her repeatedly ignored, I hope more people try to understand and offer her their friendship. I want to build a stronger relationship with my sister while seeing her included in the same social interactions I receive and see people say hello to her too. My goal of this project is to better social networks that lead to companion­ ship with people with various communication needs. I hope that people who have nev­ er interacted with someone with nonverbal autism that they understand that they want to be included and want to be their friend too. That their vocalizations do not mean that they are not interested or have little to no social interest. Instead, it could be expres­ sions of joy.

I realize that for my sister, and other people who are nonverbal, people speaking for them is considered normal or even, expected. How can I include my sister and those who are nonverbal in conversations as well? They want to be included too. They want friends too. On a personal level, I am motivated to better myself in building relation­ ships with those with different communication abilities. I hope that with the develop­ ment of Euphemia, it can help me and others see life through different perspectives and grow understanding for others.

I hope that through Euphemia, I can try to design for needs and abilities. I want to fill

any technological limitation users may have through the phone itself. The mobile appli­ cation must accommodate different needs and is responsible for creating an accessible experience that allows its users to connect with the people around them. With this goal in mind, I abide by Ability Based Design (ABD), a design approach that puts designing what users can do and what they can experience as the central focus technology de­ velopment [28]. Diana Saplacan states that assistive technologies “focus on what the users cannot do and try to fulfill that gap, ABD focus on what the users can do” [28]. Saplacan sums up the core ABD principles: “ Ability - focusing on ability rather than disability Accountability - the users are allowed to be whom they are; the responsibility of chang­ ing the design of a system to accommodate the users is put on the designers, rather than on the users Adaptation - the systems’ interface may adapt themselves or may be adapted by the users to fit the user’s needs Transparency - the system’s property to make aware the user about the adaptions Performance - the system’s property of holding track of the user’s performance Context - the system’s property of sensing the users’ context Commodity - low-cost and availability of hardware and software [28]”

This is my MDes thesis because this is something I will take with me throughout my life. After I graduate from this program, I hope to continue creating accessible technol­ ogies that bridge people together. I hope that I can take what I learn here and apply it to those around me as I enter my professional career. This thesis will challenge me to reflect on who I am as a person and how I can use my skill and knowledge to create a more inclusive world. My research investigates how people can experience nonverbal communication in various ways. How can we create a new experience as we communi­ cate with people with various communication abilities? This project is designing a new communication experience with technology. I use existing tools to create a technolog­ ical product, Euphemia. It is important to evolve and update traditional communication technologies so that accessible technologies are not a product of a past but also a product of the present and future.

Method and Approach

Moving beyond my existing Figma prototype from my prior research, I implemented specific features for Euphemia. Developing a working prototype helped me understand the limitations and opportunities of developing these ideas. For the scope of this study, I validated my Figma prototype by implementing Euphemia in SwiftUI with XCode 14, and iOS 16 to support iPhones only. Some aspects of the original concept were unfea­ sible, calling me to reframe the original problem and to create modifications to my de­ sign. This paper utilizes a two-part study with a mixed-method approach. For each part of the study, I utilize the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) and Usability Testing for each participant group. Participants were enrolled in evaluating existing AAC device, Proloquo2Go and features in Euphemia.

Part 1, Evaluating Proloquo2Go: This part of the study involved usability testing for Proloquo2Go. The core diagnostic criteria for the sample of 20 participants include any individual who has not used the PECS system, a dedicated AAC technological device, or AAC mobile application for nonverbal communication. Of the participants, 60% were categorized as designers, 30% as engineers, and 10% as medical professionals. Each participant participated in a 15-minute evaluation study of Proloquo2Go. Participants all had experience designing or engineering UI/UX software experiences and had knowl­ edge of navigating iOS products. The current version of Proloquo2Go (version 7.9) was preinstalled on an iPhone SE and a free trial of Proloquo2Go’s alternative, Proloquo­ 2Go and Proloquo2Go Coach (version 2.4) was installed on iPhone SE and iPhone X Max. Due to the restriction that Proloquo2Go had to be preinstalled to avoid additional purchases and lengthy setup processes, participants were tasked to only evaluate the design of the main application. The procedure for user testing Proloquo2Go was based on the following: Step 1: The developer briefly explains the role of the application and its installation process Step 2: On the iPhone SE, open Proloquo2Go Step 3: Try to add an image Step 4: Respond to the prompt “What would you like to eat today?” Step 5: Add prompt to the header Step 6: Read the sentence in the header Step 7: Clear the sentence in the header Step 8: Respond to the prompt “How is your day?” Do not clear header. Step 9: Respond to the prompt “What time is it?” Do not clear header. Step 10: Respond to the prompt “Do you like cheetos?” Do not clear header.

The questionnaire format for evaluating Proloquo2Go is as follows: What are your thoughts on the user interface of Proloquo2Go? What are your thoughts on the user experience of Proloquo2Go?

How do you feel about using Proloquo2Go to communicate with others? Are there fea­ tures you enjoy? Features you think can be improved or expanded upon? As a UI/UX designer or software engineer, how do Proloquo2Go’s accessibility stan­ dards compare to other apps and websites? How would you use Proloquo2Go to communicate with a new friend who is nonverbal? As a designer/engineer how satisfied/unsatisfied are you with this application? These discussions informed my analysis of existing UI accessibility protocols in Prolo­ quo2Go and the UX of AAC communication applications on Apple mobile devices only. My objective is to evaluate the design of Proloquo2Go including its features, layout, and accessibility.

Part 2, Evaluating Euphemia: The evaluation process of Euphemia called for the de­ velopment and programming of a working prototype. Unlike Proloquo2Go, Euphemia is not a complete production-ready application. In this study, participants are tasked with evaluating specific features instead of an entire application as a whole. The core diagnostic criteria for this group of participants were individuals who have experience with AAC communication devices including the PECS system and Proloquo2Go. Ad­ equate evaluation of Euphemia required feedback from a diverse pool of users. All 10 participants in this study include people with developmental disabilities, family mem­ bers of people with disabilities, applied behavior therapist (ABA) therapists, psychol­ ogists, caretakers, and special education teachers. Working with participants of this background was essential in understanding their needs and how AR and ML features can be applied in people’s everyday lives. Participant’s level of technology use and skill were widely varied. The evaluation period lasted approximately 15-30 minutes. The procedure for user testing was based on the following: Step 1: Install Euphemia onto the participant’s personal phone or borrow the developer phone, an iPhone 14 Pro Max Step 2: The developer lays out an example scenario through storytelling. Step 3: Developer and participant test the iMessage application Step 4: Developer and participant test out the AR application Step 5: The participant independently tests out the main application and the widgets

The questionnaire format for evaluating Euphemia is as follows: What are your thoughts on the user interface of Euphemia? What are your thoughts on the user experience of Euphemia? How do you feel about using Euphemia to communicate with others? Are there fea­ tures you enjoy? Features you think can be improved or expanded upon? As a UI/UX designer or software engineer, how do Euphemia’s accessibility standards compare to other apps and websites? How would you use Euphemia to communicate with a new friend who is nonverbal? As a designer/engineer how satisfied/unsatisfied are you with this application?

The results of this portion of the study gave me insight into the needs of Ms individu­

als and their care teams. Following the in-person training on how to use all aspects of the app feature and its functions, each briefed me on their thoughts and experiences. Then, filled out a questionnaire. The study assessment and the post-study interview were crucial in evaluating accessibility features designed specifically for Ms individuals.

Process and Iterative Work

Since my last research work on AAC development and design, I have learned and iter­ ated. During my development process from September 2022 - December 2022, I was pushed to rethink the user experience of Euphemia due to technical limitations. Thanks to the support of software developers including friends at Berkeley, supervisors, and online resources on YouTube I was able to learn to develop some functioning features.

Login and Account Screen

In my initial designs in Figma, I planned to have the option to sign up for Euphemia from a computer screen instead of a mobile phone. I realized that it was still important to have login, signup, and guest screens. In my second iteration of the login screens, I designed a series of steps with enlarged buttons. In my final iteration, I implemented user authentication with sign in with Apple.

iMessage App

My original idea for Euphemia was to design a custom PECS icon keyboard for iMes­ sage and SMS text messages. After watching Apple’s Worldwide Developer Confer­ ences (WWDC21 and WWDC22), I learned of additional application extensions I could utilize. I decided to pivot and design a functioning iMessage App that connects to Eu­ phemia’s main application instead of creating an iMessage PECS sticker pack. With the iMessage Extension App, I have the flexibility of 1) integrating the user’s icon imag­ es instead of a generic set of PECS icons and 2) integrating a DALLE API to generate new icon images.

Icon Creation

In my former prototype, I didn’t plan out how an individual would be able to add new icons manually to their PECS icon book. In this iteration, I considered how icons could be added to Euphemia’s screens. Where would an “add button” be positioned?

Widgets

With iOS 16, developers are now able to create lock-screen widgets. This is a new feature I had not designed yet but wanted in order to display PECS sched­ ules.

Saving Physical PECS Icons as Digital Icons

How can we add physical icons to Euphemia as digital icons in AR? I considered taking an image, retrieving it from the PECS icon database, or generating a whole new icon. In the current version, users are only able to add PECS icons that are in the database.

AR Experience with Physical PECS Icons

In previous prototypes, the only AR experience was detecting PECS icons and pulling the corresponding icon onto the phone’s screen. In my current prototype, the AR expe­ rience will include photogrammetry, taking images with the back camera, gesture rec­ ognition with the front camera, video overlay on physical PECS icons, and taping on a physical PECS icon will lead to some interaction on the phone.

Visual Design of PECS Icons

In the original concept, I was drawing each icon from scratch to create custom icon images. I was envisioning icons with various skin tones. In this iteration, I will be utilizing Apple’s Memoji and uti­ lizing DALLE to generate icon images.

Built-in Accessibility Gestures

n the Figma prototype, I was thinking that Euphemia would have two sepa­ rate apps - an administrator view and another for all other users. In this itera­ tion, I will be experimenting with touchscreen gestures to open up settings and administer view. For example, the entire hand on the phone screen for 5 seconds means navigating to the home screen. Writing the letter A on the home screen opens up the settings screen.

Euphemia, developed in XCode 14, supports the development for devices running on iOS16 and greater. XCode 14 also supports the live lock screen for iOS16 and wa­ tchOS 9 widgets in WidgetKit. In addition, dynamic islands in SwiftUI and major addi­ tions to ARKit 6. ARKit 6 allows users to capture ARFrames in 4K for photogrammetry and the creation of 3D models. Listed here are four features that I developed from September 2022 - December 2022.

Feature 1, iMessage Application: Euphemia’s iMessage Exten­ sion Application brings ASL gesture recognition and PECS icon creation into Apple iMessages. For PECS icon creation, I utilized DALLE2, a research project created by OpenAI in January 2021. DALLE2 is a “new AI system that can create realistic images and art from a description in natural language” [29]. After a user inputs a line of text, DALLE will make anything from realistic images to flat visual designs. Integrating DALLE in my application, I called the DALLE Image API to generate and manipulate images with DALLE models [29]. OpenAI only supports Python, NodeJS, and Curl libraries. As a result, I converted the DALLE curl code into SwiftUI. Due to budget constraints, my DALLE app only generates three 256 x 256 images for each cycle of prompts. Next, I integrat­ ed the DALLE code into a iMessage Extension Application. After many technical hurdles, I converted my DALLE code from SwiftUI into Storyboard. After a user downloads the Euphemia application, the iMessage app will appear in Apple iMessages. Clicking on the Euphemia micro app will open up the DALLE application where the user can input text to generate a new icon. The DALLE feature is targeted towards users who utilize any language keyboard and is interested in creating PECS icons to share with a Ms individual whose primary language is PECS.

Feature 2, App Clip Code Application: For the AR application, I utilized Apple Clip Codes. First, I generated a scan-only clip code. I chose to work with Apple clip codes due to its NFC integration option. At the moment, Euphemia’s App Clip is scan-only. According to Apple Developer docs, “An App Clip is a smart part of your app that’s discoverable at the moment it’s needed and lets people complete a quick task from your app - even before installing your full app [...] The App Clip Code offers a fast and secure launch experience for your App Clip that users trust” [30]. Euphemia’s App Clip is accessible without an installation process. Users may interact with the App Clip in AR in which Euphemia provides an AR experience with PECS icons and gesture rec­ ognition. App Clips are an important integration to Euphemia because it allows anyone to access accessibility features to learn about PECS and ASL languages. Created with ARKit and Reality Kit, this AR experience bridges communication needs in physical and digital spaces. Physical icons can be interactive with the AR experience and us­ ers may quickly create a 3D model of an object that can then be stored in their digital PECS icon library. In addition, users may take new icon images and integrate personal­ ized AR experiences with physical PECS icons all within the App Clip. Users may even scan a personal App Clip customized to a specific user to understand their physical PECS icon book. A valid application of this would be a new ABA therapist or caretaker who would like to get to know their client’s communication needs. The final integration is the Object Capture API that opens up the possibilities of photogrammetry right from the phone. At the moment, there are limitations to the technical integrations. However, users are able to take advantage of capturing 4K images in the ARFrame [31]. In future iterations when the Photogrammetry API releases for iOS, I will be integrating the abili­ ty to generate 3D objects from within the Euphemia App Clip.

Feature 3, Widgets: Euphemia applies Apple’s WidgetKit framework by providing us­ ers the opportunity to view their PECS schedule. According to Apple Developer Docs, “WidgetKit gives users ready access to content in your app by putting widgets on the iOS Home Screen and Today View [...], and by putting accessory widgets on the Lock Screen on iPhone [...] Your widgets stay up to date so users always have the latest information at a glance. When they need more details, your widget takes them directly to the appropriate place in your app” [32]. Widgets give users the ability to view what is next in their schedule without having to open the phone and navigate to the main application. The visual schedule feature is important for users that may need to break down a set of tasks for any given time period or day. Visual schedules may provide Ms individuals, particularly individuals on the autism spectrum, with a clear structure for their day. Clicking on the widget directs the user to their daily schedule in the main application. There, the user may view the rest of their schedule, request for breaks, join a virtual Zoom meeting, and make calendar adjustments.

Feature 4, Euphemia Main Application Account: Euphemia’s login screens utilize Ap­ ple’s account authentication that allows users to quickly sign in. I chose this method because, in traditional AAC devices, the setup process was lengthy and depended on a Tps to spend a great deal of time to help them setup their communication devices.

Discussion

In my paper, I investigate what inclusive and meaningful conversation means with AAC devices between people with various communication needs. My conclusions can be clustered into the following themes: - What is the future of the term, AAC? - Sending images vs. sending PECS icons? - Remote communication - Freedom of voice

Evaluation of Proloquo2Go: Measurement of user experience in Proloquo2Go included 20 respondents. The demographic of those who filled out the survey and participated in the interview were designers, engineers, and medical professionals. 80% of the par­ ticipants evaluated Proloquo2Go in person and 20% of participants remotely via Face­ Time or Zoom.

Some quotes from participants include: - “[Sigh] I’m so confused. I can’t see your sister navigating this on her own” - “I like the immediate results” - “This app feels reactive” - “This is the best AAC out there?!”

Listed here are common UI and UX observations for Proloquo2Go - Colors - the colors are too flashy and confusing. Use of colors makes things hard to focus on - Layout - Difficult to find icons. Should optimize for layouts or most used items - Folders - Folders look like icons. Expected folder to be an icon image - Size - Images are too small. Home and back buttons are too small. Difficult for some­ one with motor disabilities to navigate with important/essential buttons being so small. - Settings and Edit - The pop-up menu is too small and keyboard blocks the pop-up menus. The icons used for settings are confusing. Different buttons with different icons perform the same task. Buttons are redundant. - UI icon buttons - Wrong icon images are displayed for buttons. For example “...” al­ lowed the user to create a second, new PECS icon. “Edit” meant add any new PECS icon. - PECS icon images - Images are too flashy, unappealing.

The overall results of the questionnaire responses for Proloqo2Go included notes for improvements and comments on its simplicity. Many respondents noted that their user experience would be enhanced with UI improvements.

Evaluation of Euphemia: These discoveries and insights informed the need to complete

the entire application before the second round of user testing. The results of the user testing and the surveys showed that participants were interested in seeing how these features will evolve and integrate into a phone. I utilize the User Experience Question­ naire to collect quantitative and qualitative data concerning two mobile applications. Then, I evaluated the experience of accessible UI/UX design through questionnaires and usability testing, which was heavily based on user’s experiences and reports. Listed here are important questions participants proposed: How can you add text translation to the AR experience? I didn’t realize that the apple icon meant “go out for a walk”. How can we express vari­ ous meanings to those who don’t know? Will video icons be supported? Will people with disabilities benefit from instructions?

Future Work and Envisionments

With the emergence of new technologies, it is essential to evaluate the opportunities and challenges in AAC technologies to support designing an inclusive future. Don Douglas McMahon and Zachary Walker write, “In order to address making emerging technologies inclusive, researchers, educators, and advocates across many fields need to be engaged in bringing these new technologies into the mainstream. [33]” What does the future of communication look like between nonverbal and verbal individ­ uals in both digital and physical spaces? What does communication look like between individuals whose primary languages are PECS and ASL? Is it a truly inclusive society if AAC users can only communicate with a small subset of the entire population? These questions, which emerged from developing and evaluating Euphemia, challenge how we as a society reimagine communication and connection.

Future iterations of Euphemia and user feedback will either build on or disprove the need for upgraded AAC technologies that can be well incorporated into everyday ac­ tivities and in conversations with anyone despite language barriers. As I conduct more rounds of user testing, I will evaluate additional design requirements for creating and implementing AAC technologies. How will these AAC technologies operate in special education classrooms and in everyday life as a whole? Euphemia’s concept can be ap­ plied to Ms individuals bonding with their peers during recess on the playground. It can look like making a new friend on the playground and asking them if they can participate in a game of tag. Other scenarios include the expression of deep emotions through meaningful conversations.

Conclusion

It is highly relevant to study the experience of nonverbal communication in virtual and physical spaces. The opportunity to be heard and to hear are prerequisites for a sense of connection and belonging with others. Through my research, I open up the conver­ sation of what it looks like to include someone who doesn’t know how to speak a spo­ ken language. I investigate how communication is represented on iPhones and demon­ strate that it is important to provide Ms individuals with the right AAC tools but also just as important to invite verbal, non-users of AAC devices to learn how to meaningfully converse with Ms individuals. How can AAC users initiate deep conversations with their own vocabulary words? What could be an AAC that accommodates all individuals, non­ verbal or verbal? In future extensive research endeavors, I hope that AACs can capture the essence of nonverbal communication to contribute to a society where all voices are heard and listened to.
