Abstract

5 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

History and Prior Art

Optical illusions have been long-standing from the beginning of

civilization. Parthenon, which dates 447 BC back to ancient Greek

times, used curved floors, columns, and beams to create optical

illusions that looked perfect. The columns are not straight along

their vertical axes but seem bulged in their middle section. This

phenomenon, called “entasis,” is intended to counteract another

optical effect in which columns with straight sides appear to the

eyes to be more slender in their middle parts, so the columns can

appear to have more curves. In the recent era, artists like M.C.

Escher created drawings using optical illusions to trick our eyes. In

recent years, with the richness of media, the world has witnessed

more and more optical illusions via films such as Space Odyssey

2001 and Inceptions, or in the entertainment industries, video games

such as Portal and Superliminal, showing how optical illusions have

been widely accepted and explored throughout history.

Having been used by magicians, carnival rides, film, etc., and built

upon our cognitive beliefs and models, optical illusions are now part

of the most human element of our existence within humanity. We

take those as starting points as a design material to rethink and re

approach VR authorship. In some sense, VR is how it is because it

was developed by a species living with a set of limited senses and

cognitive models. This project seeks to unshackle those human

constraints in a new VR authoring tool.

However, optical illusions were not widely applied to practical

usage. They were predominantly limited to gimmicks and

entertainment purposes partly due to the field illusions were used

in. Yet, with the help of VR and unshackled by the restriction of

ordinary perception of space, we hope to study how optical illusions

can be used in practical applications in the field of VR.

There is no doubt that VR is still relatively a young technology

compared to other presenting industries such as films and video

games. The current VR hardware is limited by silicon chips that

are not powerful enough to drive real-time graphic renderings

and the lack of battery capacity, not to mention the lack of haptic

peripherals and sensors. Thus, VR can not reproduce our physical

world, or at least not yet with the current limitations.

However, in recent years in the field, silicon chips have made

significant strides in technological advancement in releasing Apple’s

high-efficiency M series chips. More research has been done on

carbon-based batteries with larger captivity, signaling a future

where VR is much closer to the goal of reproducing experiences of

our physical world.

The gap between the unlimited potentials in VR and the narrowness

of our imaginations inspired us to ask: What can VR offer that

cannot be done in the real world? Are these new interactions

making sense in VR environments that are simply not possible in real

life or where people have not thought about?

By admitting the current limitations of VR yet presenting new

possibilities, we hope to establish the foundation for the future of

interaction in XR.

7 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

Methods

The project investigates ways to operate VR illusion in the process

of Element combination - Illusions - Vocabulary - Use case.

1. Element combination

The design method starts by abstracting how environments are

perceived at a rudiment level in architecture, film, and video

games. By examining past works of visual illusion in buildings,

movies, and games, a common trend rose to manipulate how

the user experiences the environment. The common trends were

alteration of gravity, scale, direction, space, and form, which we

labeled as “elements.” Furthermore, these elements became the

foundation for designing different types of optical illusions in VR.

While there are many other elements we have not listed, such as

colors, time, and sounds, the team was mindful of their technical

challenges and focused on a project scope that is manageable with

our background, experiences, and skill sets. The team arranged

the elements into different combinations as inputs and outputs

from these foundational elements. Where one element is used as

an input to alter the experiences,output from the design process

was the environmental conditions. For example, using direction in

the VR environment changes the user’s experience of scale in the

environment. While the formulation of input and output elements

does have a gap between the formula and the VR optical illusion

design in detail, the procedure was for us to narrow the conceptual

down and organize the design scope in a vast range of potential in

VR.

Project  frameworks

2. Illusions

Based on combinations, we brainstormed and went through many

iterations. The iteration process was through listing all the possible

combinations and narrowing them down possible VR interactions.

While this iteration stage did not have any specific requirement

for us to achieve, we were mindful of our VR development abilities

and the technology the VR is opperatinting in such as the game

engine and the VR headset. Through these iterations, the team

came up with six VR optical illusions: space switch, space loop,

passage switch, resituate, god mode and force frame. These six

illusions were selected from the team’s considerations of the future

adaptability and scalability in the VR development.

2.1 Space Switch [Input: Direction, Output: Space] - When

the user travels between disjoint or overlapped spaces. This

illusion is a spatial-based illusion using a two-way teleport

portal to relocate the user. The observations of the illusion can

be subtle without the user noticing the transition of space or

can be direct for the user to recognize the transition.

9 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

2.2 Space Loop [Input: Space, Output: Direction] - When

the user teleports back to a previous space. This illusion

is a spatial-based illusion using a one-way teleport portal

to relocate and/or redirect the user. This illusion is most

successfully used subtly without alerting the user’s attention.

2.3 Passage Switch [Input: Form, Output: Space] - When a

user travels between detached spaces connected by a visual

passageway. Similar to Space Switch, special illusion uses a

two-way teleport portal to relocate the user but differs by

guiding the user using a visual teleport portal of the render of

the other room.

2.4 Resituate [Input: Direction, Output: Gravity] - When

users actively modify the environment’s gravity direction by

interacting with an artifact.

2.5 The God Mode [Input: Scale, Output: Form] - Actively

modify the full-scale scene in VR with miniature scale

duplicates of the real world.

2.6 Force Frame [Input: Form, Output: Space] - Using forced

perspective to transform or convert objects between different

dimensions and/or reality using one point perspective.

Space loop

Passage switch

Resituate

The god mode

Forced frame

11 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

3. Vocabulary

Our consideration of establishing vocabulary for the usage in future

VR design development. Based on illusions, we considered what is

behind the mechanism of these illusions, what is the core of each

illusion, as well as what is driving them.

3.1 Space Switch

When the user travels between disjoined or overlapped spaces.

-Use a two-way portal/stencil shader

-Provide a clear view of the room entrance

-Each room should have a distinct characteristic

3.2 Space Loop

When the user teleports back to a previous space

-Same portal location proportional to the space

-Space A and space B is identical

-Use a one-way portal

3.3 Passage Switch

When a user travels between detached spaces connected by a visual

passageway.

-Use two-way portal/stencil shader

-Use Visual Gate/Portal display view of the detached space

3.4 Resituate

When users actively modify the environment with limited capabilities

-Usefulness and controllability of the result

-Easy to use for target users

3.5 The God Mode

Actively modify the scene in VR with miniature duplicate of the real

world

-The exact copy of the movements between objects

3.6 Forced Frame

Use forced perspective to transform or convertion object between

different dimensions and/or reality using forced perspective

-Provide the proportional scale and position relative to the

user’s perspective

-Provide enough depth between the user and the object for

the eye to focus.

-Use a one-way perspective and fixed position between the

conversion/transformation.

13 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

4. Use case

Each optical illusion is then defined and categorized by its

functions and characteristics to be inspected for its use case

scenario in future VR applications.

4.1 Space switch & space loop & passage switch

Retail Experience

Shops and retail stores can overlay additional information to

physical merchandise to assist customers in understanding

products

Interactive Gallery Museum

Instead of only presenting static objects and artifacts,

museums can add interactions with the exhibited objects.

Expanding Residential Space

It is often the case that we are limited to the physical

boundary of our homes or apartments when playing VR

games. VR space seems to be confined by the physical

space. An unlimited VR space could help VR residents

expand their VR territories beyond physical limitations

where walking around in one’s bedroom can still let them

traveling in a museum with an amount of space and

exhibitions

4.2 Resituate & the god mode

Augmenting ability

We all fantasize about being able to grab things far away,

just like wizards do in Harry Potter. In VR, we don’t even

need a wand. Our abilities are unlimitedly expanded to take

control of everything in the virtual world we reside in.

Adaptive environment

Not only can we actively adapt to the environment, but the

environment can also adapt to us and respond to us.

Inclusive interaction

People with disabilities are always excluded from video

games and VR due to limited physical capabilities. The

new paradigm of interactions enable us to have inclusive

interactions without potentially excluding anyone

4.3 Picture frame

Bridge 2D and 3D

Changing reality from Physical to Digital and/or Digital to

physical, breaking the boundaries between 2D and 3DOur

consideration of establishing vocabulary for the usage

in future VR design development. Based on illusions, we

considered what is behind the mechanism of these illusions,

what is the core of each illusion, as well as what is driving

them.

15 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

Process/Iterative work

The VR design process has not yet been established or widely

discussed both academically and in industry. As trailblazers, we

are inspired by the architecture design, film storyboarding, and

game development process. Learning from architecture design,

we designed scene floor plans and decided on one artistic

style. While the project is mainly focused on the optical illusion

interaction, we consider this project as an opportunity to test the

vocabulary and design guidelines in a cohesive, uniform style in

a single environment. From file storyboarding, we learned to use

wireframing to organize the logic of the experience and design the

user journey. Game development also taught us how to use the

game engine with shaders and coding and the limitations of VR.

Discussion

Early in the prototype phase of the project, the team learned that

the game engine and VR plug-in for the game engine building

VR simulation are not designed to operate with non-euclidean

form and rendering. Being rooted in the video game field, VR

technology organically adopted the technologies and tools to

use in VR simulation. With that adoption, it also took many of the

bases of prebuilt features that are used to build 3D environments

with essential interaction that mimics our real-world interaction.

However, to develop and run the optical illusion, the project faced

many challenges and dead ends that were difficult to navigate

and foresee. The difficulty in forecasting the technical difficulties

was due to the team members’ skills focusing on design, and the

VR development tools still mostly being in progress. While the

project focused mainly on designing and building a prototype

vision of the optical illusions, the designer needed to understand

the technical possibilities and limitations of the software operating

the VR simulation and the stylish and functional choices of the 3D

environments. To create these illusions, the designer should learn

the back end of the game engine and collaborate with the team

member in charge of the software engineering. On the other side

of the spectrum, the design should also determine each piece and

layout accordingly to the VR Illusion.

17 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

The project has two main final deliverables: a working prototype of

the visual illusion in VR simulation and a definition of each illusion

in the form of vocabulary that communicates and operationalise

discrete illusionary VR elements, empowering VR authors and

designers in the creation of radically more fantastical, creative,

but consistent VR worlds. VR simulation is a visual intractable

immersive experience built and designed in a game engine to

operate in a VR headset, presenting the user the experience of

being inside the environment with the optical illusion. As we

mention before, there are six optical illusions in the project,

demonstrating the possibility of designing virtual environments

using optical illusions. Each illusion is defined for its function, style,

technical software requirements, and the future use-case scenario

from the VR simulation. By defining each illusion, the project serves

as a guidebook for the future VR designer to understand how each

illusion can be applied to their projects. And finally deliverable - the

working prototype and the vocabulary-will be packaged and shared

on GitHub for the public to download to experience, use, and

expand to further usage of optical illusions in VR.

sitemap

Scene style

Experience

logics design

19 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

Future Work and Envisionments

In the next stage of the project, we will initiate work on integrating

user tests and expanding the list of illusions. The project focused

mainly on building and developing the prototype of the illusion, and

the team had yet to use the end audience’s experience interacting

with the optical illusion. In the further development of the project,

each illusion will be tested for the viability of the VR experience.

The interview with VR developers will test how the vocabulary can

improve or be modified to better the tools for future development.

While there were many illusion prototypes in the team’s previous

design, the eight illusions were specifically picked based on the

illusion applicability and future usability in the XR development.

Conclusion

Through the Illusory Environment project, we were able to challenge

the current game engine design by developing non-Euclidean space

creating optical illusions in VR. We have observed that many current

trends in VR are shackled by physical space design. In this project,

we illustrated the possibility of using optical illusion to design

beyond the metaphor of physical reality. We hope to see more VR

designers adopting the User Interface design process by connecting

flow from one environment to another, unbound by physical

limitations.

From the perspective of a VR designer, we address the gap between

text-heavy documentation and visual effects that we set as a goal

is identified. We acknowledge that in VR, both visual design and

development are heavily relied upon and explored, but people

have yet to recognize the gap in between. By delivering illusion

design packages and tutorials, we hope to not only inspire more

XR developers and designers to continue exploring possibilities in

illusion design in XR but also make it easier for both designers and

developers to deliver what they hoped for and skip potential bugs

and failed trials where we spent countless time on this project.

We also actively responded to previous critics, questioning if

these illusions are more like gimmicks. However, the project was

able to address the  question by examining the future use case

and application of the optical illusion in XR. Thinking from several

perspectives and industries where VR and AR technologies can

be heavily utilized, we have logically established a framework

for different illusions, design guidelines, and corresponding

applications, establishing both comprehensive and enlightening for

future XR designers and developers.

In addition, we also identify our works to be un-illusionalizing, in

the way that illusions might become useful and so common in the

future that it becomes ordinary and ubiquitous in VR. Just like

we are used to elevators and escalators in our buildings hundreds

of years ago when they were also identified as gimmicks, we are

encouraged that the use of VR will become an essential part of our

future lives In a sense, we are non-illusionalizing illusions, creating

new patterns and paradigms for future human-XR interactions.

21 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji

Citation

Bowman, D. A., and McMahan, R. P. (2007). Virtual Reality: How Much Immersion Is

Enough? Computer 40, 36–43. doi:10.1109/MC.2007.257

Dinh, H. Q., Walker, N., Hodges, L. F., Chang Song, C., and Kobayashi, A. (1999).

“Evaluating the Importance of Multi-Sensory Input on Memory and the Sense of

Presence in Virtual Environments,” in Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality (Cat. No.

99CB36316), Houston, TX, USA, 13-17 March 1999, 222–228. doi:10.1109/VR.1999.756955

Kilteni, K., Maselli, A., Kording, K. P., and Slater, M. (2015). Over My Fake Body: Body

Ownership Illusions for Studying the Multisensory Basis of Own-Body Perception. Front.

Hum. Neurosci. 9, 141. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2015.00141

Lombard, M., Ditton, T., Crane, D., Davis, B., Gil-Egui, G., Horvath, K., et al. (2000).

“Measuring Presence: A Literature-Based Approach to the Development of a

Standardized Paper-And-Pencil Instrument,” in Third International Workshop on

Presence, Delft, Netherlands.

Nowak, K. L., and Biocca, F. (2003). The Effect of the agency and Anthropomorphism of

Users’ Sense of Telepresence, Copresence, and Social Presence in Virtual Environments.

Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 12, 481–494. doi:10.1162/105474603322761289

Stoffregen, T. A., Bardy, B. G., Smart, L. J., and Pagulayan, R. J. (2003). “On the Nature

and Evaluation of Fidelity in Virtual Environments: Applications, Implications, and

Human Performance,” in Virtual and Adaptive Environments. Editors L. J. Hettinger, and

M. W. Haas (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc), 111–127.

Kubrick, S., & Clarke, A. C. (1968). 2001: A space odyssey. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Corp.

Nolan, C. (2020). TeneT. Warner Bros.

Nolan, C. (2010). Inception. Warner Bros.

Valve Corporation. (2011). Portal 2(2.0) [Video game]. Valve Corporation.

Electronic Arts. (2021). It Takes Two(1.0) [Video game]. Hazelight

Studios.

CodeParade. (2022). Hyperbolica(1.1.9) [Video game]. CodeParade.

Alexander Bruce. (2013). Antichamber(1.1)  [Video game]. Demruth.

23 Illusory Environment : Elijah Lee | Xiaobai Ji
