Abstract

4 Lindahl Jared, Kaplan Christopher, Winget Evan, Britton Willoughby, A phenomenology of meditation-induced light experiences: traditional buddhist and neurobiological perspectives, Frontiers in Psychology, Volume 4, 2014.

Secondary research

In order to learn more about the user behavioral pattern and the expectations about

meditation practice, secondary research is performed over contextual interviews and

quantitative behavioral user research with deliberation. The secondary research mainly

focused on investigating the motivations and the needs of meditation practitioners.

Recent studies have shown that the experienced meditation practitioners and beginners

have different inclinations in why they started meditating, but share a common top

motivation “Out of curiosity”. Reading advertisements and recommendations by a doctor

or therapist had no impact on meditators’ motivation. In terms of need and continuing

reason, the top choices are claimed as “Calm down” and “Contentment and clarity”.5 This

study suggests that meditation practitioners nowadays might possess a higher passion in

the beginning stage and requires a behavioral strengthening process to persist.

Existing adjacent products and experience

The majority of the existing meditation experience could be categorized based on different

taxonomy axes. This section mainly discusses the axis of the Interaction Interface and

their user experience design patterns.

Mobile interface

Mobile meditation apps enjoy the most popular among meditation beginners with their

engaging content, the convenience of use and ease of onboarding. The top meditation apps

used by beginners are Headspace, Balance, and Calm.

The apps are mostly structured in a form of a progressive learning repository with guided

meditation recordings categorized into different themes, including sleep, getting rid of

addiction, relaxation, focus and concentration, etc. The recordings are often accompanied

by relaxing sounds sampled from nature for the users to customize to facilitate their

meditation process.

Another trend of the mobile meditation apps is visualizing the meditation progress over

time to incentivize the users to persist and continue to a higher level of practice indicated

by meditation duration time, frequency and data log such as subjective mood input.

5 Sedlmeier, P., Theumer, J. Why Do People Begin to Meditate and Why Do They Continue?. Mindfulness 11, 1527–1545 (2020).

Critiques about the mobile meditation apps argue that these experiences are homogenous

in their instructional and didactic approach to teaching the beginners to follow a specific

practice pattern and that the gamified add-ons fall short in matching the deeper needs of

the users to persist.

Wearable interface

Applying physiological input and tactile stimuli to instruct users during the meditation

process is one largest benefits of the wearable interface. Popular wearable meditation

experiences are hosted on Apple Watch and Fitbit, which can provide vibration to guide

the users to exhale and inhale, and collect physiological data like heart rate to provide

analytic reports over time.

Virtual reality headset interface

Virtually reality has been a popular interface for meditation experience since the

introduction of URP (Universal Rendering Pipeline) in Unity3D which serves as the basis

of the high-solution dynamic graphic environment. The immersive nature of virtual reality

provides an escape experience for the users to concentrate and focus on the meditation

practice and visual cues to follow.

The existing products leverage different approaches to market their differentiators. E.g.,

Maloka, a character-based app, creates a gamified experience for the user to explore the

virtual world with their meditation progress with plants and animal-like avatars. ZenVR, a

simulated meditation room experience, applied vivid and figurative avatars of Zen masters

to teach meditation and breathing techniques in a community-based environment.

Researchers at Helsinki University explored a dyadic meditation experience in virtual

reality between two participants, which visualizes progress bars between the two figurative

meditator avatars encoded by different colors to represent the amount of empathy-related

approach motivation measured with the EEG signals.6

Nonetheless, there is also a challenge about whether virtual reality might enhance or

depreciate social empathy and the positive mental health effects compared to a more

conventional meditation approach.

In conclusion, the existing studies and adjacent products span from the immersive audio

and visual environment to purely instructional meditation handbooks that cater to different

user personas. However, users of the existing products expressed that they still feel that

6 Simo Järvelä, Benjamin Cowley, Mikko Salminen, Giulio Jacucci, Juho Hamari, and Niklas Ravaja. 2021. Augmented Virtual Reality Meditation: Shared Dyadic Biofeedback Increases Social Presence Via Respiratory Synchrony. 4, 2, Article 6 (June 2021), 19 pages.

there is a misalignment between their meditation patterns and the feedback from the

interfaces aforementioned.

Constraints

Technical Constraints

Despite the lack of technical knowledge and curricular support, the designer had decided

to take on the responsibility to research, design and develop the experience into an

interactable prototype. A tradeoff between the technical realization and the fidelity of the

overall experience was also taken into consideration throughout the whole process of this

project.

Resource Constraints

Limited resources and inaccessibility to apparatus that can measure respiration with

precision is also a great challenge to the completion of this project. The available

apparatus and prototyping tools are constrained to Oculus Quest 2 headset, and Arduino

Uno Board with necessary input sensors and output interfaces.

Time Constraints

The designer is well aware of the fact that this is a 15-week project that also requires

extensive research on the cluster-wide tangential topics and had to work in an agile

development style to ensure the delivery of the feature requirements.

Defining Minimum Viable Product

Considering the scope and constraints above, the project was defined to present an

interactive prototype narrating the concept of visualizing the meditator’s breath in a

calming form in the virtual reality environment.

Process And Design Iterations

Ideation

By synthesizing the research insights and constraints aforementioned, a design problem

emerged as follows: How might we create a simple and calming interaction for the user

to take the initiative to visualize their breathing input in a non-intrusive way?

Choice of input/physiological data

The existing methods of measuring breath primarily include nasal airflow sensors,

capnography monitors, abdominal movement detection, sound analysis and manual

counting. To decide the optimal input of breathing measurements, intrusiveness, accuracy

and measuring cost were the three main factors to consider according to the design

problem above. The abdominal movement was finally chosen as the input measurement

for its low intrusiveness, comparatively high accuracy with its lower cost in

measurement.

One of the largest challenges in this project is deciding on a channel to monitor human

abdominal movement, which is the proxy for respiration. The designer brainstormed on

the possible inputs generated from human abdominal movement as follows:

Increased pressure on the covering fabric

This input requires a stress sensor to detect the change of perpendicular force pointing

outward the human body, but it might create discomfort for its lack of elasticity when tied

to the human body.

Enlarged tension in the abdominal skin area

Similar to the first input, this requires a tension sensor embedded into the fabric wrapped

around the human body in the abdominal area.

Elongated circumference of the abdomen

Resistance of conductive material could be regarded as a proxy for length, an alternative

way to measure abdominal movement with this input is by constructing a laser length

sensor within a reflector and a phototransistor bundled with an IRLed light.7 This

7 https://create.arduino.cc/projecthub/marco-polo-sauza-aguirre/breathing-sensor-1-respirationsensor-1b18de

method was discarded for its technical difficulty in programming the phototransistor

interface.

Material exploration

The designer decided to take the second measurement as the optimal input channel and

explored possible sensors on the market. The ideal sensor candidate was EeonTex

Conductive Stretchable Fabric COM-141128 but was inaccessible due to the retirement

of the product.

An alternative way of fabricating the stretchable sensor was explored during the last

week of the project, i.e. knitting entwined thread of conductive yarn and elastic yarn into

a stretchable “belt” wrapped on the abdominal area of the meditator. This method

incorporated the enlarged tension and elongated circumference mentioned above.

According to the Resistivity and Conductivity formula: R∝ρL/A (ρ=Resistiviy,

L=Length, A=Cross section area), the total resistance will increase in proportion to the

increase in conductive length, which can be read in Arduino analog as input.

Consider a meditator practicing diaphragmatic breathing, as they inhale, the elastic yarn

will be stretched, while the resistance of the conductive yarn will increase as the

conductive length is elongated as it slides through between the wire clips, and vice versa

as they exhale.

Arduino-unity interface

Another huge challenge to realizing the interaction in virtual reality is building a

communication channel between the input read from Arduino and the game engine Unity.

The tool to tackle this challenge is Uduino9, a Unity plugin that connects Arduino boards

and Unity in real-time. One limitation of applying this plugin is the requirement to keep

the Arduino board and the Oculus headset connected during the signal communication

process, such that the user had to experience the interaction with the headset connected to

the developing desktop with limited freedom to move around.

8 https://www.sparkfun.com/products/retired/14112

9 https://marcteyssier.com/uduino/

Choice of output/visualization

In the preliminary stage of this project, the design invested a great amount of time to

explore the visualization output to provide an immersive and calming environment. Three

visualization concepts of the respiratory movement were explored as follows.

Flowing bowl among the two players

Referring to a Chinese ancient prose, Preface of the Orchid Pavilion (蘭亭集序), written

by Xizhi Wang (王羲之), one of the greatest calligraphers in Chinese history, “floating

the wine glasses on a winding brook engirdled” (流觴曲水) is an elegant and metaphoric

behavior to exemplify the serenity and calm in one’s mind. The scene is set to be an

exterior pond where the two players will sit across from each other with a tree of flowers

resting beside them. As they take turns breathing, a bowl will be spun around between

them to collect the falling flower petals. The goal of this game is to exchange the flower

petals until all the petals are exchanged and replaced on their trees. This concept was

discarded for the difficulty in comprehending the literal metaphor from the perspective of

a different cultural population and technical feasibility.

Geometry transformation

Applying the change of the sensor analog to morph a simple geometric component form

from a “decomposed” state (breathing out) to a “solid” state (breathing in). This concept

was discarded for the lack of immersion in the scene and the difficulty in mapping the

animation to the sensor analog.

Breathe to move on

Mapping the change of the sensor analog as the speed of the user avatar in the virtual

reality environment to move the user along a specific path. This concept was eventually

adopted into the prototype for its simplicity and the potential to customize the scene with

comparatively lower efforts.

Design Prototype

Design is an endless, iterative process, therefore, terms like “outcome” or “final design”

could be construed as false statements by some designers. “Design Prototype” is applied

here instead of “Final Design” to avoid the perception that this thesis will be the end of

this project.

Adjustable strap as the wearable interface

The knitted stretch sensor was attached to an adjustable strap belt with Velcro strips to

build the initial wearable prototype, which is connected to Arduino with two alligator

clips for analog input.

River scene

The virtual environment was built as a calming river scene with relaxing natural sounds

where the user will experience the flowing movement in the space with their breath.

Eventually, the user will reach a destination marked by a rotating geometry as a symbol

of a completed session.

Exhale/Inhale threshold

To distinguish whether the user is resting, inhaling, holding their breath, or exhaling, two

thresholds were defined (hereinafter referred to as thres1, thres2 (thres1 < thres2)). A

simple snippet of the pseudocode to realize the avatar moving feature is attached as follows.

The complete Unity project can be accessed through the link:

XingtaiHuang/VRbreathing · GitHub.

float r = analog.read;

string state;

If (r < threshold1) :

state = “rest”;

Else if (thres1<=r < thres2):

If (f’(r)>0):

state = “inhale”;

avatar.accelerate;

Else if (f’(r)<0 ):

state = “exhale”;

avatar.decelerate;

Discussion

During the final presentation, the designer harvested an ample amount of valuable

feedback, this section will discuss how the feedback relates to this project and possible

directions to move forward.

Why virtual reality

As discussed in the secondary research section, virtual reality differentiates itself from

other interfaces with immersion and the deprivation of the visual sense of the users.

Although other interaction modalities e.g. desktop screen-based interaction, mobile

screen-based interaction, tactile interaction, etc. are also possible options. Applying

virtual reality provides an opportunity for the user to walk around the scene while moving

themselves forward using their breath as a pushing force.

While this might elicit some concerns about VR motion sickness, a stricter examination

of the potential users’ physical and mental status should be performed before

experiencing this interaction, which is out of the scope of this project, but still crucial to

the completion of the concept.

Endless scene

Since breathing is not defined as an activity with a start and an end, critiques also

questioned the rationale for choosing a scene with a specific destination. This opens more

space for exploration in the form of the breathing visualization, e.g. modifying the scene

into an endless loop or leveraging the breathing input to change the virtual environment

at the same time, etc.

Future Work and Envisions

Completion of the game mechanism

As this project is limited in time and resources, the realization of interaction only serves

as a preliminary prototype for testing and iteration. Further exploration into the complete

game mechanism or user experience is necessary, e.g. how the user starts and ends the

session, whether the “leveling up” mechanism will be implemented, etc.

Incorporating social connections

The initial concept of Sh’Air was to “Share the Air” between two meditators, but due to

the technical constraints, this part of the interaction is not illustrated in the design prototype.

Some possible concepts of social connections within this prototype might be meeting over

the water as the pair synchronize in their breathing patterns or towards the completion of

one breathing exercise.

Considering other visualization output alternatives

The design prototype was criticized as “dry” for some users as expected, incorporating

other interactive components will be ideal to engage the user during the practice process.

Enhancing user motivations and building an ecosystem

Learning from the adjacent existing mobile products, the habit-forming behavior is an

important aspect of user retention. How to incorporate the VR headset experience and the

meditation data history into the quotidian interfaces on mobile devices and desktop

computers is another possible direction of this project.

Conclusion

In a summary, the designer assumed the responsibility to explore an end-to-end novel

approach to visualize respiratory activity in virtual reality environments with abdominal

movement as an input measured by a knitted stretch sensor. While there are also other

alternatives to solve this problem, the method explored in the Sh’Air project opens new

ground for discussion on the measurement and visualization of breath in virtual 3D

environments.

Acknowledgments

Although the designer is not graduating, this project serves as the culmination of their

achievements in the Master of Design program.

He would like to take this opportunity to give special acknowledgments to the instructors,

Kyle Steinfeld and Eric Paulos who strived to explore the pedagogy of the Design Studio

class in the infant stage of the MDes program, even though there is a misalignment between

the students’ goals and the class structure.

Acknowledgment also goes to Sabin Ciocan, the graduate student instructor of this class,

who helped the students to push forward their projects with an excessive dedication to his

work.

He would also like to appreciate the help from his cluster mates, Elijah Lee, Xiaobai Ji,

and Zhiyue (Luna) Wang, who provided invaluable technical support and shared their

insights that are crucial to the completion of this project.

Last but not least, he would also like to express gratitude to his mother, Cuixia Xu, who

taught him how to knit and purl stitches with her own hands when he was still an

elementary school kid, which is the primary motivation and the crucial technical skills for

the completion of this very knitted stretch sensor.
